CHAPTER FOUR
Autonomic and attentional
pathways in the emergence of
autism: bridging mechanisms
and real-world contexts in
infancy
Jessica Bradshaw a,b,∗, Emma Platt a,b, Julia Yurkovic-Harding a,b,
Samuel Harding a,b, Xiaoxue Fu a,b
a University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
b Carolina Autism and Neurodevelopment Research Center, Columbia, SC, USA
∗Corresponding author: e-mail address: jbradshaw@sc.edu.
Contents
1. Developmental cascades and the emergence of ASD 	103
2. The role of autonomic nervous system function as an early regulatory mechanism
in ASD 	105
2.1 Autonomic dysfunction and autism in preterm infants 	107
3. The role of attention as an early regulatory mechanism in ASD 	109
4. The coupling of ANS and attention: autonomic regulation of attention 	111
4.1 Developmental course of autonomic regulation of attention 	112
4.2 Autonomic regulation of attention and ASD: a developmental framework 	114
5. ANS and attention: cascading consequences in ASD 	116
6. Multimodal methods in naturalistic contexts: an approach to understanding
heterogeneity in ASD 	117
6.1 Naturalistic studies of attention and ANS 	118
6.2 Feasibility of head-mounted eye tracking in very young infants 	118
6.3 Gaze patterns in naturalistic contexts in young infants at elevated likelihood
for ASD 	121
6.4 A synchronized system for studying physiological regulation of attention in
naturalistic settings 	122
7. In-Home studies as a representative and inclusive approach to science 	123
8. Conclusions 	126
References 	126
99	Advances in Child Development and Behavior, Volume 69
ISSN 0065-2407
https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.acdb.2025.07.006
Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All
rights are reserved, including those
for text and data mining, AI
training, and similar technologies.

-- 1 of 35 --

100 	Jessica Bradshaw et al.
Abstract
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) unfolds over the first two years of life through complex
interactions among developmental systems. Attention and autonomic nervous system
(ANS) regulation represent foundational processes critical for adaptive engagement with
the environment. Disruptions in these systems during early infancy may initiate develop-
mental cascades that contribute to core ASD features, including social-communication
challenges and restricted and repetitive behaviors, as well as the vast heterogeneity
found within ASD. This chapter reviews our approach to integrating mechanistic research
and real-world methodologies to explore autonomic and attentional pathways in the
early development of ASD.
We conduct prospective, longitudinal studies to track how ANS regulation and attention
unfold in infancy in infants at elevated and low familial likelihood for ASD. By integrating
multimethod approaches to study these functions in naturalistic contexts, we demon-
strate that autonomically regulated attention mechanisms support key developmental
milestones and may play an important role in the emergence of ASD. Findings presented
provide preliminary support for the theory that infants later diagnosed with ASD ex-
hibit early disruptions in parasympathetic modulation of arousal and attention across
responses to social and nonsocial contexts.
This work emphasizes the value of leveraging portable, non-invasive technologies to
study early autonomic and attention processes in naturalistic contexts. By using this ap-
proach to uncover formative mechanisms underlying ASD, we enhance the translational
potential of this research while addressing critical gaps in inclusivity and representation.
Understanding autonomic and attentional systems in infancy provides an opportunity
to identify cascading developmental divergences and promote adaptive developmental
trajectories in ASD.
Keywords: Autism, Autism spectrum disorder (ASD), Infancy, Dynamic systems, De-
velopmental cascades, Respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA), Parasympathetic, Autonomic
nervous system, Attention, sustained attention, social attention, Head-mounted eye
tracking, Naturalistic
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) emerges from the complex interplay of
developmental systems, where early differences cascade across developmental
domains to shape growth and adaptation over time. Understanding these
dynamic processes in the early development of ASD requires bridging
theory with application to address critical questions: How do foundational
developmental systems unfold in ASD? How do these early developing
systems initiate cascading pathways that shape the emergence of ASD? How
can our science most directly translate to actionable early identification and
intervention strategies that can be implemented dur ing cr itical developmen-
tal windows?
The developmental emergence of core features of ASD occurs gradually
over the first three years of life, with diagnostic certainty often achieved
by age 2-3 years. Despite most diagnoses occurring between 2-5 years of

-- 2 of 35 --

Autonomic and attentional pathways in the emergence of autism 	101
age, robust evidence suggests that neurological processes underlying ASD
are already underway shortly after birth (see (Dawson et al., 2023) for
a review). Core features of ASD include delays and differences in social
communication and interaction, alongside repetitive behaviors and restricted
interests (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Prospective longitudinal
designs have been used to track the development of infant siblings of children
with ASD, with the goal to identify early markers of ASD and advance
early detection and intervention methods (Szatmari et al., 2016). These
baby sibling research designs comprise cohorts of elevated likelihood infant
siblings of children with ASD (EL) and low likelihood infants without
a family history of ASD (LL). Approximately 20% of ASD siblings are
diagnosed with ASD at age 2-3 years and an additional 30% exhibit atypical
development and/or subclinical features of ASD (Ozonoff et al., 2011;
Ozonoff et al., 2024). These research designs have been instrumental in
advancing the field and bringing us closer to identifying mechanisms and
pathways in ASD (Messinger et al., 2013; Ozonoff & Iosif, 2019; Szatmari
et al., 2016; Zwaigenbaum et al., 2005; Zwaigenbaum et al., 2015). For
example, as a result of infant sibling research, we have identified social-
communication delays and repetitive behaviors as early as 9-12 months,
revealing early iterative processes that shape and are shaped by subsequent
skills and developmental outcomes (Bradshaw et al., 2021; Pileggi et al.,
2021). Outside of core features of ASD, findings from such studies have
reported even earlier differences in foundational developmental processes,
like attention and autonomic nervous system (ANS) functions.
Atypical attention is among the earliest of these developmental processes
to characterize individuals with ASD and persists as a lifelong feature of ASD
(Ness et al., 2019; Murias et al., 2018; Bradshaw et al., 2019; Kaliukhovich
et al., 2020; Frazier et al., 2017). Research has demonstrated that atypical
attention is not only detectable in early infancy but is also predictive of later
developmental outcomes (Bradshaw et al., 2020; Di Giorgio et al., 2016;
Jones & Klin, 2013). However, the biological mechanisms underlying these
early disruptions remain poorly understood. One promising avenue of inves-
tigation lies in another foundational system—the autonomic nervous system.
ANS is an early-emerging bioregulatory system essential for regulating
neonatal arousal and attention (Brazelton & Nugent, 2011; Feldman, 2006;
Porges & Furman, 2011). Disruptions in the ANS’s regulation of attention, or
“autonomic regulation of attention,” may initiate a series of cascading effects
that influence social interaction, learning, and broader development. While
general ANS dysfunction has been documented in older children diagnosed

-- 3 of 35 --

102 	Jessica Bradshaw et al.
with ASD (Cheng et al., 2020), less research has focused on whether and
when such dysfunction contributes to atypical attention in infancy and how
early autonomic regulation predicts the emergence of ASD symptoms.
Baby sibling research to date relies heavily on laboratory-based methods
that pr ior itize exper imental control. These approaches, while valuable, sim-
plify the complexities of infants’ natural environments, which are rich with
experiential and adaptive factors critical to development. Naturalistic data
collection—capturing behavior or specific neurodevelopmental processes
in everyday environments—represents a conceptual shift in our scientific
approach, embracing the dynamic, contextual factors that shape develop-
ment, rather than removing them in lab-based experiments or controlling
for them in statistical analyses (Tamis-LeMonda et al., 2024). By observing
infants in their lived environments, researchers can access the very influences
that drive developmental trajectories. Studying attention and ANS in these
contexts, while leveraging portable, noninvasive technologies, not only
advances knowledge of developmental mechanisms, but also bridges the gap
between research and practice, facilitating earlier detection and intervention
strategies that can be seamlessly implemented in real-world settings.
Naturalistic methods also offer a pathway to address longstanding dispar-
ities in participant representation by enabling research in a variety of home
settings. Participants in baby sibling studies predominantly comprise white,
higher-resource families. Descriptive data from the past three decades of
autism intervention research show that white participants have the highest
rate of participation, comprising 64.8% of sample cohorts (Steinbrenner
et al., 2022). This underrepresentation limits understanding of ASD across
diverse populations and addressing these disparities is essential, not only
for equity, but also to fully capture the heterogeneity of developmental
contributing to the phenotypic diversity of ASD.
Building on emerging findings in attention, ANS regulation, and the
dynamic interactions among these systems in the early emergence of
ASD, we propose a unified framework that integrates existing literature
and our findings to better understand how foundational systems in real-
world settings initiate cascading effects in the emergence of ASD. First, we
explore how cascading developmental processes—specifically, disruptions in
attention and autonomic regulation—shape typically developing and ASD
trajector ies dur ing infancy. Next, we highlight the promise of portable,
noninvasive technologies like head-mounted eye tracking (HMET) and
synchronized home-based systems to capture these processes in real-world
settings. Finally, we address critical challenges in participant inclusion and

-- 4 of 35 --

Autonomic and attentional pathways in the emergence of autism 	103
representation, underscoring the importance of studying diverse populations
to ensure findings are relevant and translatable to broader contexts. By
bridging mechanistic research with innovative methodologies and inclusive
approaches to research, we aim to contribute to the current understanding
of ASD development in infancy and create more direct pathways toward
early detection and intervention.
1. Developmental cascades and the emergence of ASD
A developmental cascades framework views development as contin-
uous, cumulative interactions and transactions across various developmental
domains, biological systems, and environmental contexts (Masten & Cic-
chetti, 2010; Oakes & Rakison, 2019). It provides a lens for investigating how
lower- or higher-level processes produce cross-domain,reciprocal effects that
influence outcomes later in development. Importantly, cascades highlight
both specific developmental mechanisms and the dynamic interactions
among multiple mechanisms that unfold over time to shape development.
Individual exper iences contr ibute to the divergence of developmental tra-
jectories, creating opportunities for individualized input driven by the infant,
which, in turn, influences future developmental pathways.
Developmental cascades offer a useful framework for understanding the
early development of ASD, comprised of cascading processes, where early
differences in foundational systems, including autonomic and attentional
systems, set off a ripple effect that can enrich or disrupt downstream
developmental pathways (Bradshaw et al., 2022a; Iverson et al., 2023;
Karmiloff-Smith, 1998; Thelen & Smith, 1995). Among these foundational
systems, attention stands out as a particularly intriguing process that may be
altered in individuals with ASD. Variability in early attentional processes can
significantly influence later social, cognitive, and communicative develop-
ment. In ASD, early attentional differences may contribute to the atypical
development of social communication abilities (Bradshaw et al., 2022a).
Early attentional processes undergo rapid development over the first few
months of life (e.g., by 6–10 weeks), driven by a shift from subcortical to
cortical control of behavior. Critical elements of early-developing attention
processes—such as disengaging from stimuli, shifting focus, and filtering
irrelevant information—are foundational for cognitive and behavioral de-
velopment (Colombo, 2001; Xie, 2017; Conte & Richards, 2021; Hunnius,
2007). Achievements of these early attentional milestones coupled with
co-occurring achievements in other domains (e.g., motor and cognitive)

-- 5 of 35 --

104 	Jessica Bradshaw et al.
for m a cr itical foundation for continued growth in social, language, and
cognitive domains, making early attention a key focus for understanding the
mechanisms underlying atypical developmental trajectories, including those
observed in ASD.
In ASD, atypical patterns of visual attention represent the result of, and
contributor to, influential developmental cascades that begin in infancy.
Reduced attention to socially relevant stimuli, such as eyes and faces, as
well as more generalized difficulty disengaging from focal stimuli, emerge
within the first year of life (Chawarska et al., 2013; Fu et al., 2024; Jones et
al., 2016). These subtle variations in attention may not constitute diagnostic
cr iter ia for ASD, but have broad implications for social development. For
example, reduced visual saliency of the eyes of a face in early infancy could
lead to diminished attention to eyes in later infancy, which may reduce the
frequency and quality of interactions with caregivers, resulting in missed
opportunities for social learning, and may reinforce nonsocial attentional
preferences over time, as is observed in ASD (Pierce et al., 2016).
Atypical visual attention is also evident in young EL infants, irrespective
of their eventual diagnostic outcome (Di Giorgio et al., 2021; Di Giorgio
et al., 2016). While these attentional differences may be transient (Bradshaw
et al., 2020), they point to an underlying genetic basis for atypical social
attention in ASD. Genetics strongly influence visual attention patterns
throughout childhood (Kennedy et al., 2017; Constantino et al., 2017)
which further influence information processing and social interactions.
Together, these findings highlight the role that biological predispositions
for social or nonsocial stimuli play in the developmental cascades that lead
to ASD.ASD-specific differences in lower-level attention processes, such as
attention orienting and disengagement, may stem from atypical neural and
neurochemical development. Disruptions in arousal regulation and visual
processing circuits have been proposed as potential early contributors to
attentional variability in ASD (Artoni et al., 2020; Hazlett et al., 2017).
Arousal regulation is driven by the sympathetic-parasympathetic balance of
the autonomic nervous system. The parasympathetic branch of the ANS
supports attention and readiness for cognitive engagement, pointing to
the ANS as a critical biological factor in the development of attention,
attentional control, and visual processing. Cascading effects of early ANS
dysfunction are less well studied, but early differences in ANS and neural
circuitry could initiate developmental cascades that affect both regulatory
behavior and subsequent brain development, which may shape later pat-
terns of social engagement and learning. For instance, difficulties with
both arousal modulation and attention shifting may compound, negatively

-- 6 of 35 --

Autonomic and attentional pathways in the emergence of autism 	105
affecting infants’ ability to engage in triadic interactions with objects and
caregivers. These interactions require a calm arousal state and effective
attention shifting to facilitate entry into a shared space of joint attention and
engagement. Such states of joint engagement with caregivers and objects
are critical for language acquisition and higher-order cognitive integration
(Adamson et al., 2019; Adamson et al., 2009; Thorp, 2006; Conway et al.,
2018).
Overall, the developmental cascades model frames development as a
dynamic system, where interactions between biological predispositions, de-
velopmental processes, and environmental inputs continuously shape un-
folding trajectories. Early disruptions in the foundational systems discussed
here, including autonomic regulation and visual attention, can cascade to
affect social communication, motor development, and broader neurocog-
nitive functions. Mechanistic frameworks for ASD therefore highlight the
convergence of multiple subsystems and underscore the need for integrative,
multimodal approaches to studying its emergence.
2. The role of autonomic nervous system function as an
early regulatory mechanism in ASD
Systems-level biological factors known to distinguish those with vs.
without ASD include genetics, brain development, and physiological arousal.
Among these biological systems, the ANS plays a central role in regulating
behaviors essential for social and cognitive development. Understanding
parasympathetic function as a component of ANS provides insight into its
contribution to developmental cascades in ASD. There is robust evidence
that ANS-driven physiological systems support behavioral regulation, social
engagement and interaction, and attention and cognitive processing (Porges
& Furman, 2011; Heilman et al., 2007; Porges, 2003; Richards, 2010; Thayer
et al., 2009; Whedon et al., 2018). This body of work lays the foundation
for examining how developmental trajectories of autonomic and attentional
mechanisms in infancy shape development, initiate cascades, and contribute
to outcomes.
ANS regulation is governed by the balance of sympathetic and parasym-
pathetic activation, with the sympathetic nervous system activating during
times of stress (“fight or flight”) and the parasympathetic nervous system
activating during times of rest (“rest and digest”). This delicate balance enacts
physiological changes in basic functions, such as decreasing heart rate or
increasing body temperature to support infants’ healthy responsiveness and
adaptation to environmental demands.

-- 7 of 35 --

106 	Jessica Bradshaw et al.
In early prenatal development, physiological functions are driven primar-
ily by sympathetic influence. Higher cortical processes begin to integrate
autonomic control in the late prenatal and early postnatal period leading
to increasing influence of the parasympathetic nervous system. As ANS
matures, parasympathetic influences support calm states of alertness and
sustained attention that are essential and provide countless opportunities for
development across domains, including social and language learning. In this
way, ANS is considered a “developmental resource” in the neonatal and early
infant period that mediates infant-environment interactions.
Physiological measures used to index parasympathetic function include
heart rate variability (HRV) and respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA). Both
HRV and RSA reflect variability in the influence of the parasympathetic
system on the heart, with HRV reflecting variability in heart rate and RSA
reflecting variability in heart rate at the frequency of respiration. An adaptive,
regulated ANS involves continuous changes to heart rate, making increased
variability (higher HRV and RSA) indices of parasympathetic influence
over the heart. HRV and RSA undergo significant maturation in infancy
and early childhood, and, when measured dur ing per iods of rest, our work
demonstrates that the first six months of life is a period of particularly rapid
growth (Fig. 1). Throughout development, higher HRV and RSA at rest
reflect an infant’s readiness and capacity to regulate arousal and maintain
engagement with their surroundings. During times of stress, RSA decreases
due to the suppression of the parasympathetic system to make way for
sympathetic influence. RSA suppression supports mobilization of the fight
or flight system, which includes heightened arousal and cognitive focus.
Evidence indicates that more RSA suppression in response to stress reflects
a healthy, responsive neurophysiological system (Bazhenova et al., 2001;
Porges et al., 1996). Studies that demonstrate links between RSA suppression
and developmental outcomes, for example social interaction and language,
strengthen these claims.
To evaluate the link between RSA suppression and positive developmen-
tal outcomes, we conducted a longitudinal study of infants at elevated and
low likelihood for ASD (Bradshaw & Abney, 2021). RSA was measured in 3-
4-month-old infants during a semi-structured infant-caregiver interaction.
The structure of the interaction was modeled after the still-face procedure,
but infants and parents were not constrained in terms of positioning or
movement. The infant was placed in supine on the Table while the caregiver
stood in front of them interacting as they normally would at home for
5 minutes. At that time, the caregiver was cued to sit down and ignore

-- 8 of 35 --

Autonomic and attentional pathways in the emergence of autism 	107
Fig.  Trajectory of mean, resting RSA in typically developing infants from 2 to 24 months
of age.
their infant for 2 minutes while maintaining a neutral expression. Because
they were no longer face-to-face during this time, both the infant and
caregiver were free to visually explore their environment, and the infant
was able to move as they liked. After this 2-min period, the caregiver
interacted with their infant again for 2 min. RSA was measured during
each phase of this interaction, and RSA suppression was indexed as the
difference between RSA during the “play” phase and RSA during the
“ignore” phase. We found that RSA suppression during this task at 3-4
months positively associated with parent-reported social communication
skills at 9 months. These findings suggest that appropriate parasympathetic
responsivity to environmental demands, particularly those that are social in
nature, may initiate developmental cascade that supports early social learning,
which in turn fosters early social-communication development.
. Autonomic dysfunction and autism in preterm infants
Decreased parasympathetic influence on the heart, reflected in lower HRV
and RSA, can signal underlying ANS dysfunction (Thayer et al., 2009;
Mathewson et al., 2014; Propper, 2012). Consistent with studies of children

-- 9 of 35 --

108 	Jessica Bradshaw et al.
and adults, and theoretical frameworks that describe ANS as a foundational
regulatory function that is disrupted in ASD (Cheng et al., 2020; Patriquin
et al., 2014; Sheinkopf et al., 2019), we have found differences in early
ANS function and a high prevalence of ASD in infants born preterm.
Preterm birth presents a unique context for studying ANS dysfunction, as
these infants experience major challenges in early autonomic development.
Substantial ANS maturation occurs in the second half of pregnancy, and
preterm birth (born <37w GA) significantly disrupts the development of
ANS, along with the overall functioning of the PT newborn (Mulkey &
Plessis, 2018). The drastic transition to the extrauterine environment that
occurs amidst ongoing ANS maturation is a clash that is compounded by
exposure to medical stressors. As a result, autonomic maturation is impaired
throughout the PT period, fails to normalize at term age equivalent (Fyfe
et al., 2015), and may alter long-term temporal programming of ANS
(Haraldsdottir et al., 2018). This early process initiates a developmental
cascade that disrupts initial and subsequent physiological adaptations to the
environment, and may affect the integration of autonomic control into
later-developing, higher-level cortical processes important for social learn-
ing and cognitive development, such as attention. These early disruptions
may be a critical factor in the emergence of ASD features, leading to
heightened likelihood of ASD in very PT infants compared to the general
population.
Building on the theoretical and empirical evidence linking ANS dys-
function to PT infants and to ASD, we conducted a prospective, longitudinal
pilot study of very preterm infants (born < 32 weeks gestational age) in
which we examined the predictive link between neonatal ANS dysfunction
and later-developing ASD symptoms (Bradshaw et al., 2024). In this study,
we collected continuous, multimodal measures of ANS dysfunction. ANS
measures comprised minute-by-minute thermal gradients,defined as the dif-
ference in neonatal peripheral temperature and core temperature (Knobel-
Dail et al., 2017), and hour-by-hour abnormal heart rate indices, measured
using Heart Rate Characteristic (HRC) scores derived from HeRO Moni-
tors, (Fairchild & Aschner, 2012). Heart Rate Characteristic Scores reflect an
algorithm that considers beat-to-beat heart rate, heart rate variability, inter-
beat interval (IBI) standard deviation, and IBI skewness (Fairchild & Aschner,
2012). Thermal gradients and HRCs were collected for 28 days after
birth (>40,000 samples/infant) in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU).
Throughout the 28 days, ANS dysfunction was characterized by an average
HRC score >1 and abnormal negative thermal gradients for about 20%

-- 10 of 35 --

Autonomic and attentional pathways in the emergence of autism 	109
of the time (6 of 28 days). Following NICU discharge, comprehensive neu-
rodevelopmental follow-up consisting of standardized measures of cognition,
language, and motor skills were collected at adjusted ages 6, 9, and 12 months.
Adjusted ages equate the neurological and physical development of preterm
infants with that of full-term infants, whereas chronological age equates
duration of time in the extrauterine environment with that of full-term
infants. At 12 months adjusted age, assessments of social communication and
early ASD symptoms were administered using the Systematic Observation
Rating of Features of ASD (SORF; Dow et al., 2017).
In this small pilot study of very preterm infants who were retained in the
study and followed to 12 months, we observed that the neonatal abnormal
heart rate characteristics were strongly correlated with ASD symptoms at
12 months (r = 0.81, p<.01), as was birth gestational age, birth weight, and
abnormal negative thermal g radients. A reg ression model including GA, BW,
and HRC scores revealed a significant, unique predictive effect of abnormal
heart rate indices on ASD outcomes (model r = 0.86, p=.017; HRC Score:
r=.72, p=.029). Overall, these results show a surprisingly high association
between ANS dysfunction in the neonatal period and ASD features at 1
year of age in very PT infants. This study provides compelling evidence for
the role of ANS dysregulation and its cascading effects in the development
of ASD. Whether this points to ANS as a catalyst for an ASD-specific
developmental cascade, or reflects a developmental endpoint in an earlier
cascade that serves as a more direct mechanistic pathway to ASD remains
unknown, but highlights the need for further research into early autonomic
mechanisms as predictors of ASD.
3. The role of attention as an early regulatory
mechanism in ASD
Although atypical attention does not constitute a core feature of
ASD, mounting evidence suggests impairments in attentional networks are
pervasive and lifelong, constituting a central feature of ASD. Attentional
disengagement is among the earliest reported features of ASD, particularly
in EL infants (Zwaigenbaum et al., 2005; Elsabbagh et al., 2009). Attention
disengagement is the process of shifting attention from one stimulus to
another and serves as a regulatory mechanism that modulates arousal. A
bidirectional relationship between arousal and disengagement would involve
effective arousal modulation facilitating attention disengagement, and failure
to disengage leading to further dysregulation.

-- 11 of 35 --

110 	Jessica Bradshaw et al.
Our research demonstrates that atypical attention can be observed as early
as three months of age in EL infants (Bradshaw et al., 2020) and infants who
go on to develop ASD (Bradshaw et al., 2021). In these studies, we used
a neonatal neurobehavioral exam to evaluate attention throughout the first
five months of life. In the first study, we examined trajectories of visual and
auditory attention to animate (faces and voices) and inanimate (objects) from
1 week to 5 months of age in EL infants and compared them to LL infants.
We also tested associations between early attention and 12-month social-
communication and cognitive outcomes.
Trajectories of attention across the first five months of life illustrated
significant growth over time for both EL and LL infants. However, EL infants
exhibited lower performance on the attention tasks at 2 and 3 months,
particularly in visual attention tasks, compared to their LL peers. However,
this difference was transient and by 4 and 5 months, their performance
aligned with that of LL infants. Contrary to our expectations that social
attention (i.e., animate attention tasks) would diverge most from that of LL
infants, we found that attention to both animate and inanimate visual stimuli
was lower dur ing this time per iod, highlighting generalized vulnerabilities
in attention during early development. At 12 months, early attention at 3
months was significantly associated with social-communication skills and, to
a lesser extent, nonverbal cognitive skills.
In a follow-up study, we compared the same attention measures in
infants who went on to develop ASD with those of typically developing
infants (Bradshaw et al., 2021). Based on our earlier findings (Bradshaw et
al., 2020), we focused on attention at 1, 2, and 3 months. Results showed
that attention development differentiated infants with ASD from their TD
peers. At 1 month, attention scores were comparable between groups, but
by 2 and 3 months, infants with ASD exhibited significantly diminished
attention. Further exploration revealed that this finding was most robust
for visual, inanimate, attention (attention to objects). The difference in
inanimate attention at 3 months in infants later diagnosed with ASD may
reflect disruptions in the transition from reflexive to volitional control of
attention during a critical period of neurodevelopment.
At birth, attention to visual stimuli is pr imar ily subserved by subcortical
mechanisms that enable reflexive orienting. This allows the youngest of
neonates to orient to and track objects and faces. By 2 to 3 months,
however, cortical systems, particularly those in the parietal and prefrontal
reg ions, beg in to mediate volitional attention and attentional shifting. This
transition supports the development of more complex behaviors, such as

-- 12 of 35 --

Autonomic and attentional pathways in the emergence of autism 	111
joint engagement with objects and caregivers, which are foundational for
social and communication skills. Infants with ASD may experience delays
or disruptions in this cortical-driven process, resulting in diminished ability
to orient to and sustain attention on inanimate stimuli. Moreover, orienting
requires visual disengagement from other salient stimuli and visual tracking
requires motor control and movement of head and neck that aligns with eye
movements. Both attention disengagement and motor challenges, particu-
larly head, neck, and trunk control (Bradshaw et al., 2023), are observed in
very early development in ASD. These difficulties with attention disengage-
ment from social or environmental stimuli, as well as impaired coordination
between visual and motor systems, may also explain the attention differences
observed in these studies. Together, these results emphasize the importance
of attentional processes during the 2- to 3-month window, possibly the result
of underlying neurodevelopmental or regulatory vulnerabilities, which may
shape developmental pathways later observed in ASD.
4. The coupling of ANS and attention: autonomic
regulation of attention
Attention and parasympathetic activation both serve as foundational
regulatory functions throughout the lifespan. In infancy, the coupling of au-
tonomic regulation and attention is a cornerstone of an adaptive engagement
system, The ANS modulates attention by regulating heart rate responses
dur ing infor mation processing, particularly through parasympathetic activity.
A well-functioning ANS enables neonates to override metabolic demands
and generate physiological responses, such as heart rate deceleration, which
support sustained attention and enhance stimulus processing (Lester et al.,
1996; Richards, 2004; Richards & Turner, 2001).
Parasympathetic-driven attention responses underpin three distinct
phases of attention—attention orienting, sustained attention, and attention
termination—each linked to cognitive and learning processes (Richards,
2010; Richards, 2004). Among these, sustained attention, plays a particularly
crucial role in cognitive engagement. Characterized by prolonged look
duration and heart rate deceleration, sustained attention facilitates pr ior iti-
zation of relevant stimuli while reducing distractibility, resulting in selective
information processing and recognition memory (Richards & Hunter, 1998;
Reynolds & Richards, 2005).
Heart rate measures of sustained attention represent a noninvasive
method for understanding cognitive and neurological processes that underly

-- 13 of 35 --

112 	Jessica Bradshaw et al.
sustained attention. During sustained attention, the heart rate slows and
remains decelerated, signaling heightened cognitive engagement and infor-
mation processing. As sustained attention shifts to the third phase, attention
termination, heart rate returns to baseline, reflecting diminished arousal and
increased distractibility (Richards, 2004). Sustained heart rate deceleration
reflects the activation of arousal systems, crucial for maintaining attention,
while the return to baseline during termination marks disengagement
(Richards & Casey, 1992). Heart rate-defined sustained attention (HRDSA)
can be indexed with duration of the heart rate deceleration, and the
magnitude of the heart rate change, or the depth of deceleration. HRDSA is
said to offer a more precise measure of information processing than looking
behavior alone (Colombo, 2001; Reynolds et al., 2011; Xie & Richards,
2016). This sequence highlights the dynamic role of parasympathetic activity
in regulating attention and underscores the importance of HRDSA as a
measure of meaningful attention and engagement during infancy.
. Developmental course of autonomic regulation of
attention
Attention undergoes significant changes during the first two years of life,
shaped by the maturation of attention networks. Early in infancy, posterior
attention systems support visual orienting and disengagement, while anterior
attention systems involved in executive control emerge after six months.
These neurodevelopmental milestones contribute to varied trajectories in
attention metrics. For instance, look duration, which indicates visual learning
and encoding, follows a triphasic trajectory: increasing during the first two
months, decreasing between three and six months, and rising again after six
months (Colombo, 2001; Richards & Anderson, 2004).
To further investigate the dynamic unfolding of these regulatory pro-
cesses, and to comprehensively document the development of attention in
context, we examined age- and context-dependent differences in looking
behavior and physiologically-regulated sustained attention. In a two-year
longitudinal study, we mapped trajectories of attention in over 50 infants
from 1 to 24 months of age. To understand the effect of stimulus on
attention patterns, we included four distinct stimulus conditions—social
videos, nonsocial videos, social interactions, and nonsocial interactions—
across multiple attention metrics that included overall looking time, mean
look duration, percent time in HRDSA, and heart rate deceleration during
HRDSA episodes.

-- 14 of 35 --

Autonomic and attentional pathways in the emergence of autism 	113
Results of this study showed that during the first six months, overall
looking time increased across all conditions, with screen-based tasks eliciting
more looking than live interactions. However, contrary to expectations,
a drastic decline in attention to the caregiver’s face during the social
interaction was observed between 4-6 months and was lower than all
other stimuli by 6 months. The decline in face-looking coincides with
developmental gains in motor skills and executive control of attention,
which facilitates a broader, more dynamic exploration of the environment.
The emergence of these skills is also closely tied to the maturation of
cortical control of attention, particularly the development of the anterior
attention network. This network underpins voluntary attention shifting and
disengagement, processes that are crucial for adapting to and learning from
a complex, multimodal environment. Importantly, our data showed that
HRDSA during face-looking remained stable or increased slightly during
this period, suggesting that while infants may look at caregivers’ faces less
frequently between four and six months, these looks reflect stable cognitive
engagement and efficient processing. This highlights the value of HRDSA
as a measure of meaningful attention.
In the second year of life (9–24 months), attention measures become
more stable across all task conditions, with videos (both social and nonsocial)
eliciting more sustained attention than live toy interactions. This may be
due to the perceptual saliency and cognitively engaging content of videos
compared to the real-world demands of interactive tasks, which require the
infant to initiate the interaction and engage motor and cognitive resources
for sustained engagement. Social videos elicited longer look durations
compared to nonsocial videos during this period, suggesting an enhanced
attention to social stimuli as infants’ communication and language skills
develop.
Findings from this study highlight the importance of considering both
context and measurement method in studies of infant attention. Our results
suggest that behavioral measures—percent looking and look duration—
capture general behavioral trends, while HRDSA and heart rate deceler-
ation provide deeper insights into cognitive engagement. The divergence
between these attention measures demonstrates that reduced looking time
does not necessarily indicate diminished attentional engagement, especially
in dynamic, interactive contexts. This underscores the need for multi-
method approaches to studying infant attention, particularly for identifying
early markers of atypical development. Overall, this study establishes a
multimethod-informed trajectory of typical infant attention over the first

-- 15 of 35 --

114 	Jessica Bradshaw et al.
two years of life, providing a reference point for comparisons with other
populations, such as EL infants or those with ASD.
. Autonomic regulation of attention and ASD: a
developmental framework
The evidence is clear that physiological measures of attention, reflecting
ANS’s regulation of attention, are related to cognition and learning. Early
disruptions in autonomic regulation of attention then may have cascading
consequences for interaction, learning, and development (Feldman, 2006;
Porges & Furman, 2011; Bradshaw et al., 2022). Based on current liter-
ature and our preliminary data, we propose a developmental framework
that highlights the role of ANS dysregulation in attention very early in
development and has cascading effects on learning and development. In
this framework, global ANS function, which supports neonatal arousal and
reactivity, appears intact at birth. Arousal and reactivity during this period are
pr imar ily dr iven by sympathetic activation, allowing newborns to respond
to environmental demands, such as crying in response to internal states like
hunger and pain. However, as parasympathetic regulation matures during
infancy, it has increasing influence over the heart and becomes critical for
maintaining a calm state and modulating attention. Adaptive modulation
of arousal and attention then supports sustained cognitive engagement and
readiness for social interaction. In infants who develop ASD, this transition
to effective parasympathetic regulation may be disrupted.
This disruption may underly observed attention differences in the 2-
3 month period (Bradshaw et al., 2020; Bradshaw et al., 2021), when
parasympathetic modulation of attention becomes increasingly necessary for
adaptive functioning. Ineffective parasympathetic modulation interferes with
the ability to sustain attention to relevant stimuli and flexibly shift attention
to novel, salient stimuli. This impairment may diminish the quality and
frequency of learning experiences, particularly those that involve social and
communicative interactions. Over time, the resulting cascade may contribute
to the emergence of core ASD features, including difficulties in social
communication and behavioral flexibility.
Preliminary data that support this framework include trajectories of
heart-defined sustained attention during naturalistic parent-infant interac-
tions from 1-4 months across EL, LL, and PT infants. These trajectories
are characterized by a significant increase in heart rate (HR) deceleration
during sustained attention and point to a dampened HR deceleration that

-- 16 of 35 --

Autonomic and attentional pathways in the emergence of autism 	115
Fig.  a. Developmental trajectory of heart rate deceleration within periods of heart
rate-defined sustained attention (HRDSA) during infant-caregiver interactions across
ASD, TD, and PT infants. b. Association between deceleration within periods of HRDSA
measured during infant-caregiver interactions at 3-4 months and social-communication
skills measured at 9 months.
is developmentally transient for PTs, but persistent for EL infants (Fig 2A;
(Bradshaw et al., 2022b). Moreover, we have found that HR deceleration
during sustained attention to caregivers at 3 months is associated with early-
emerging symptoms of ASD (Bradshaw and Abney, 2021) (Fig. 2B).
In a preliminary investigation and an extension of our previous work
(Bradshaw et al., 2024), we examined physiological measures of attention to
social and nonsocial videos across EL and LL infants from 1 to 24 months
of age. While LL infants demonstrated an emerging distinction between
social and nonsocial attention based on both behavioral and physiological

-- 17 of 35 --

116 	Jessica Bradshaw et al.
measures in the second year of life, with greater attention to social stimuli,
this differentiation was absent in EL infants. Specifically, for EL infants, the
proportion of time spent looking to the screen and the proportion of looking
classified as HRDSA were equivalent across both types of stimuli. This was
not driven by diminished attention to both social and nonsocial stimuli,
but rather high levels of both social and nonsocial attention. Trajectories of
social attention between EL and LL infants did not differ. These findings
suggest that from 12 to 24 months, LL infants exhibit enhanced attention
to social stimuli or attenuated attention to nonsocial stimuli. In contrast, EL
infants engage in equally high levels of attention to both social and nonsocial
stimuli, reflecting a lack of differentiation in attentional pr ior itization that
may underlie or reflect early disruptions in social engagement.
5. ANS and attention: cascading consequences in ASD
In ASD,the transition to effective parasympathetic modulation of ANS
in the first year of life emerges as a critical developmental inflection point.
ANS dysregulation during this period may limit the capacity for sustained
attention and adaptive engagement. This framework has yet to be fully
tested, but there are at least two alternative consequences to a dysregulated
autonomic-attention system. First, instead of ANS dysregulation cascading
into a less efficient attention control system, compensatory mechanisms
may lead to the need for increased parasympathetic activity, evidenced by
deeper heart rate decelerations and higher RSA, needed to achieve similar
levels of regulation and attention as neurotypical infants. And second, there
may be a decoupling of ANS regulation and attention mechanisms in
ASD, meaning that other systems are employed to regulate attention and
that parasympathetic influence over the heart may not necessarily serve to
regulate attention or other processes. This may lead to the deployment of
other systems and mechanisms to facilitate regulation. These other systems
may not only be less effective, but may take away from resources allocated
to other neurodevelopmental processes.
Taken together, these findings emphasize the importance of examining
parasympathetic function and autonomically regulated attention as both a
developmental resource and a potential early marker of ASD. By integrating
behavioral and physiological measures of attention, such as HRDSA, future
research can refine models of neurodevelopment and identify early pathways
leading to ASD. This approach offers promise for earlier detection and
intervention strategies that target attention and autonomic regulation to

-- 18 of 35 --

Autonomic and attentional pathways in the emergence of autism 	117
mitigate developmental disruptions and promote adaptive learning and
interaction.
6. Multimodal methods in naturalistic contexts: an
approach to understanding heterogeneity in ASD
The phenotypic manifestation of ASD is strikingly variable across
individuals. This heterogeneity is apparent in early developmental path-
ways as well. While some infants exhibit clear trajectories toward an ASD
diagnosis, others show more variable patterns, including transient symp-
toms, or delayed onset of early ASD markers and behaviors (Landa et
al., 2007). Through a developmental cascades framework, we understand
environmental contexts play an important role in developmental trajectories
and outcomes. The effect of environmental contexts on developmental
trajectories of ASD is understudied, but interactions between biological and
experiential factors likely influence the observed heterogeneity in outcomes.
While statistical models can, and often do, control for context variables like
socioeconomic status (SES) or early intervention history, these adjustments
may not fully account for the nuanced variability observed in naturalistic
social interactions or home environments. As an example, differences in
motor actions and possibly motor skill development in infancy can be
influenced by the home environment, even subtle features like furniture
arrangement or flooring textures. For instance, a bedroom with limited
furniture at the height level of an infant might lead to fewer opportunities for
cruising behavior, an important bridge milestone to independent walking.
Alternatively, an infant in this environment may benefit from enriched
social interactions as caregivers provide support for the infant to cruise
while they practice walking. The child’s behavior is therefore a result of
the interaction between the child’s own abilities and the environmental
opportunity to develop and express these abilities. Similarly, infant behavior
and physiological regulation, measured with RSA, have been found to
be modulated by maternal sensitivity (Girod et al., 2024), highlighting
how physiological and behavioral differences emerge only under specific
contextual conditions. Together, these examples highlight the need to study
early markers situated within an individual’s environment, familial context,
behavior, and biology. These nuanced, interconnected dynamics set the
stage for examining how specific physiological and attentional mechanisms
interact with environmental contexts to uncover specific developmental
pathways of ASD.

-- 19 of 35 --

118 	Jessica Bradshaw et al.
. Naturalistic studies of attention and ANS
Thus far, we have discussed studies of physiological regulation and attention
that occur in largely controlled, lab-based environments. While these studies
provide valuable insights into the mechanisms underlying early differences
in infants who develop ASD, they often fail to capture the dynamic and
multifaceted nature of real-world infant experiences. In everyday life, infants
are immersed in rich, complex environments where attention is constantly
influenced by interactions with caregivers, fluctuating contextual demands,
and evolving developmental capacities. These complex factors both shape
and are shaped by the infant’s ongoing development. Naturalistic settings
present challenges for researchers aiming to measure attention and other
neurodevelopmental processes in a way that reflects their real-world func-
tionality while maintaining methodological rigor.
To address this gap, we have leveraged specialized approaches that bridge
two highly valued features of developmental science: experimental control
and naturalistic contexts. Advanced tools like head-mounted eye tracking
(HMET) capture infants’ moment-to-moment visual engagement within
everyday social environments. This method allows us to observe how infants
allocate their attention to social and nonsocial features of their environment
as they interact with their caregivers and surroundings. By applying this
approach in infant sibling studies of ASD, we aim to uncover nuanced
patterns of attention that are both influenced by and predictive of early
developmental trajectories. These efforts provide a more comprehensive
picture of how attention unfolds in the dynamic, real-world contexts shaped
by social, motor, and cognitive development.
. Feasibility of head-mounted eye tracking in very young
infants
Infant social attention develops within an intricate, embodied context
shaped by dynamic interactions with caregivers, objects, and the broader
environment. Traditional, lab-based approaches fail to capture the real-
time, bidirectional processes through which caregivers scaffold infant be-
havior and infants explore their surroundings. HMET technology offers
an innovative lens to study infant social attention within naturalistic and
even home-based contexts. Unlike traditional screen-based eye-tracking
methods that constrain participants to fixed positions and controlled en-
vironments, HMET provides the unique ability to capture real-time gaze
patterns as individuals move, interact, and engage with their surroundings. By

-- 20 of 35 --

Autonomic and attentional pathways in the emergence of autism 	119
integrating lightweight cameras mounted on a headband or cap, researchers
record both the wearer’s gaze and their field of view, enabling precise
mapping of attention within three-dimensional, everyday environments.
This approach is particularly valuable for studying infants, whose behaviors
and interactions unfold in dynamic and unpredictable ways that cannot be
fully captured in static laboratory settings (Bradshaw et al., 2023). Recording
gaze behavior during naturalistic interactions facilitates the study of how
attention is dynamically shaped by factors like body posture, movement,
and environmental affordances. Moreover, HMET enables researchers to
capture moment-to-moment coordination between individuals, such as how
a caregiver’s gaze and actions influence an infant’s attention or how joint
attention is established during shared activities. These capabilities make
HMET an essential tool for understanding the embodied and interactive
nature of attention, particularly in populations with atypical development,
such as children with ASD,where traditional paradigms may not fully capture
the nuances of their real-world social behavior.
The first study to employ HMET with children diagnosed with ASD
offered surprising results that challenge longstanding models of social at-
tention deficits in ASD (Yurkovic-Harding et al., 2022). Contrary to the
extensive literature emphasizing social attention deficits, in particular gaze
patterns to faces, and impaired joint attention skills in children with ASD,
this research revealed that children with ASD show no significant differences
in real-world attention to faces during free play with a caregiver compared
to their typically developing peers. Both TD children and those with ASD
spent minimal time looking at their caregiver’s face during naturalistic play,
with face-looking accounting for less than 2% of the interaction time.
These results are particularly striking considering the vast research landscape
illustrating social attention deficits in ASD that has guided our understanding
and core models of ASD etiology.
In addition, the study examined joint attention, or coordinated visual
attention (CVA), between children and caregivers. CVA is defined by
moments of child and caregiver simultaneous gaze to the same object.
Again, both groups demonstrated comparable rates of CVA, predominantly
via alternative pathways, such as manual interactions with objects. This
observation also runs counter to prevailing notions that gaze to face is
the primary conduit for establishing shared attention, or CVA. In the
early ASD literature, joint attention, which involves CVA with a social
partner for the explicit purpose of sharing attention to the same object or
event, is predominantly characterized by discrete instances of child behavior,

-- 21 of 35 --

120 	Jessica Bradshaw et al.
including point- and gaze-following (child response to joint attention), or
distal pointing and/or two-point and three-point gaze shifts between faces
and objects (child initiation of joint attention). These cues represent the
primary pathways to joint attention. While deficits in these pathways are
well-documented and clinically significant (Adamson et al., 2009; Dawson
et al., 2004; Leekam & Ramsden, 2006; Naber et al., 2007; Nyström et al.,
2019; Warreyn et al., 2007), Yurkovic-Harding et al. (2022) suggests they may
represent reliable markers of ASD rather than causal mechanisms underlying
the disorder.
The study’s context—a naturalistic, free-flowing play environment—
exemplifies the critical importance of context and advanced tools that
effectively capture the breadth and impact of this context. Unlike the
constrained settings of traditional laboratory-based paradigms, the use of
HMET in this study captures the complexity of real-world interactions,
during which infants and caregivers co-construct shared attention through
dynamic, multimodal exchanges. By highlighting the potential for alternative
pathways to support social and communicative development, this research
opens new avenues for understanding developmental trajectories in ASD.
Leveraging the strengths of HMET in naturalistic contexts, we have
explored how this tool can be applied in the earliest stages of infancy to
examine embodied attention in everyday environments. Existing HMET
research has largely focused on toddlers and children, leaving a gap in how
infants, particularly those as young as four months old, coordinate attention
with their caregivers and surroundings. In a longitudinal study of infants at
low and elevated familial likelihood for ASD, we evaluated the feasibility,
acceptability, and data quality of using HMET with four- and eight-month-
old infants (Bradshaw et al., 2023). These age points represent developmental
per iods of motor ic transitions and achievement of key milestones, that is,
reaching and crawling. The eight-month study age point also represents a
formative developmental period just preceding the beginning emergence of
social and communicative behaviors. By situating these investigations in the
home environment, where infants engage in the vast majority of interactions
with their caregivers, this study pushes the boundaries of what can be
achieved with wearable eye-tracking technology. As such, a key goal of the
study was to evaluate whether HMET could be successfully implemented
in the home with younger infants who lack independent head control—a
population previously understudied due to these technical challenges—and
to assess the acceptability of these procedures for caregivers. Additionally, the
study aimed to explore early developmental changes in infant gaze behavior,

-- 22 of 35 --

Autonomic and attentional pathways in the emergence of autism 	121
particularly shifts in attention between caregivers and objects, and how these
patterns might vary by age or ASD likelihood.
The application of HMET to infants as young as 4 months in the
home environment proved to be highly feasible. A custom headband was
designed for 4-month-olds that pr ior itized comfort and camera stability, as
even slight shifts can have significant impacts on data quality. All infants
tolerated the placement of the headset, and the data collected met established
cr iter ia for accuracy and precision, with only minimal data loss across
sessions. Importantly, caregivers reported high levels of acceptability, with
most indicating that the experimental procedures did not disrupt their
infant’s natural behavior. The retention rate from the 4-month to 8-month
visit was also high, reflecting strong engagement from participating families.
Together, these findings suggest that HMET, when paired with appropriate
equipment and methodological adjustments, can be successfully adapted for
use in a home setting and with young, possibly neurodivergent, infants—
even those as young as four months of age.
. Gaze patterns in naturalistic contexts in young infants at
elevated likelihood for ASD
Preliminary analyses of gaze behavior reveal intriguing developmental trends.
At 4 months, infants spent significantly more time looking at their caregiver’s
face compared to 8-month-olds, whose gaze was more frequently directed
toward objects in the play environment. This pattern reflects developmental
shifts in social and attentional pr ior ities, as younger infants rely heavily
on face-to-face interactions while older infants begin to explore their
surroundings more independently. Notably, these trends align with existing
literature demonstrating a decline in face-looking and an increase in object-
focused attention across the first year of life (e.g., Bradshaw et al., 2024).
In addition, these results extend those of Yurkovic-Harding et al.
(2022) showing that despite the availability of caregiver faces for the vast
majority of the time during the 4-month-old infant-caregiver interactions
(76%), their gaze to face was strikingly low (16%). At 8 months, availability of
the caregiver’s face was dropped significantly (only 17% of the interaction)
and proportion of time infant’s gazed to the caregiver’s face was only
5%. These results seem to challenge long-standing assumptions driven by
evidence of infants’ attentional bias toward faces in lab-based settings (e.g.,
Leppänen, 2016; Peltola et al., 2018; Reynolds & Roth, 2018). While faces
are often emphasized as highly salient in controlled settings, naturalistic
data reveal more nuanced patterns of social attention, shaped by real-world

-- 23 of 35 --

122 	Jessica Bradshaw et al.
complexities. The home environment offers a rich, dynamic backdrop for
studying how infants and caregivers co-construct interactions, with care-
givers often scaffolding attention through behaviors like naming, touching,
and positioning objects. By capturing these behaviors in situ, HMET allows
researchers to examine not only what infants attend to but also how their
attention is guided and supported by their social partners.
We have also explored CVA and the pathways into CVA among 8-
month-old EL and LL infants. Analyses identified three key differences
between the groups. We found that look durations to toys were greater
for EL infants and bouts of CVA were fewer in EL infants compared
to LL infants. This aligns with deficits in attention shifting and attention
disengagement that is observed in infants and toddlers who later develop
ASD. Additional analyses are needed to thoroughly interpret this preliminary
finding, but it is likely that EL infants attend to the same toy for longer
periods, and their caregiver follows their attention, leading to fewer CVA
bouts. In addition, we see that EL infants’ CVA episodes are more often
infant-initiated, with 66% of CVA bouts in the EL group being infant-led.
That is, the CVA bout began with the infant directing their gaze toward a
toy, followed by the parent coordinating their attention to the same toy. This
proportion was significantly higher than that observed in LL infants, whose
CVA episodes were more balanced between parent-led (47%) and infant-led
(53%) pathways.
Together, these studies offer new perspectives on how lab-based mech-
anistic studies of infant attention may translate to and inform studies of
attention allocation in real-world settings—the very contexts that shape
and support development and learning. Leveraging HMET and other
technologies to study embodied attention and natural behavior, we can
further understand attention, not only as a set of discrete behaviors, (e.g.,
attention disengagement, attentional social preference) but as an emergent
property of dynamic interactions, offering new pathways to understanding
how developmental trajectories take shape in both typical and atypical
populations.
. A synchronized system for studying physiological
regulation of attention in naturalistic settings
HMET is not the only advanced tool that can be made portable and imple-
mented in the home to study developmental trends in infant development.
In our longitudinal studies of EL and LL autonomic regulation of attention,

-- 24 of 35 --

Autonomic and attentional pathways in the emergence of autism 	123
we have used home-based data collection to study behavior in naturalistic
contexts and to address barriers to access for research participants. Our
team has developed the Lab2Home (L2H) system – a tailored, portable,
and scalable apparatus designed to bring rigorous laboratory-quality data
collection directly into participants’ homes. The L2H system is tailored for
studies requiring synchronized data streams from multiple video angles and
concurrent heart rate monitoring for both parent and child.Synchronization,
a cornerstone of L2H, is achieved using a combination of custom-written
and open-source software with redundant methods to ensure millisecond
precision. Devices utilize a shared computer clock for alignment of time-
stamped data, while a custom-built microcontroller triggers an LED array
recorded by all cameras and logged into the experimental system for added
accuracy. Additionally, visual time displays are embedded into recorded video
streams to align seamlessly with heart rate data. These measures ensure that
all data modalities remain synchronized throughout the procedure, even in
diverse and variable home environments.
L2H is compact, lightweight, and designed for rapid setup and break-
down, reducing logistical overhead during testing. The system’s hardware
includes three high-definition (1080p, 60fps) USB-C cameras mounted on
adjustable tripods to accommodate a range of home layouts, from spacious
living rooms to confined apartments. High-capacity portable power banks
power the system for over 10 hours, allowing uninterrupted operation even
in homes without access to reliable power. Heart rate data collection is
facilitated by two CamnTech Actiheart-5 wireless monitors—one for the
parent and one for the child—while a small-profile condenser microphone
with preamp ensures high-quality audio recording and strategic placement.
The central microcontroller, an Arduino UNO WiFi REV2 outfitted with
a multicolor LED array, coordinates the system’s operations seamlessly.
The L2H apparatus not only facilitates the collection of rich,high-quality
data but also reduces the systemic barriers that often limit the participation of
historically underrepresented populations in research. By enabling data col-
lection in familiar home environments, L2H supports studies that aim to un-
derstand developmental processes in the very contexts in which they unfold.
7. In-Home studies as a representative and inclusive
approach to science
Naturalistic data collection, particularly in the home, offers a unique
window into infant behavior and development in real-world contexts,

-- 25 of 35 --

124 	Jessica Bradshaw et al.
affording the possibility of more ecologically valid data while maintaining
high standards of rigor. Moreover, the cost of travel for participants, in terms
of time, vehicle mileage, and gas expenses, decreases accessibility of research
participation for families from diverse sociodemog raphic backg rounds, even
when monetary compensation is provided. Inclusivity and representation
are incredibly important to confirm our science to be representative of and
generalizable to the broader population at large.
To evaluate the experimental and ecological validity of in-home data
collection, we administered parallel experimental and naturalistic tasks lon-
gitudinally to two groups of infants who participated in in-lab study visits
(n = 29, 63%) or in-home study visits (n = 17, 37%). Infants were seen
from 2-24 months of age, resulting in a total of 167 lab visits and 106
home visits. Following data collection, caregivers rated their child’s observed
emotional and interactive states. Caregiver report of emotional reactivity
dur ing exper imental and clinical procedures significantly differed by context
(χ2(2) = 12.64, p = 0.002) with lab-based sessions yielding more parent-
reported atypically negative emotional reactivity (n = 23; 13.8%) compared
to home-based sessions (n = 4; 3.8%). Ratings of interest and attention
during the tasks did not significantly differ by setting (χ2(2) = 2.76, p
= 0.252). These findings suggest that the controlled lab environment may
contribute to more atypical behavior, that is, negative emotional reactivity,
suggesting more typical behavior in the home environment and possibly
more representative and valid data. Experimental data from variables of
interest was also comparable across home vs. lab contexts. The percentage
of valid, usable behavioral and electrocardiogram (ECG) data was not
significantly different (p = 0.73, p = 0.89, respectively).
A home-based approach may also increase inclusivity and accessibility of
participant cohorts. Traditional lab-based studies often fail to engage families
living in rural areas or from underrepresented socioeconomic groups, such as
Black, Indigenous, and people of color (BIPOC). By bringing research into
the home, we expand the demographic reach of participants, paving the way
for a representative, enriched dataset that includes diverse populations. In our
analysis of a separate cohort of participants who opted to complete home vs.
lab study visits (see Table 1), household income significantly differed (χ2(1)
= 8.99, p = 0.003), with 40.7% of home-enrolled participants earning
$60,000 or less annually compared to 11.1% of lab-enrolled participants—
well below the state average household income (South Carolina; $92,833).
As expected, the average distance from the participant’s home to the lab
was significantly higher for the home-enrolled participants (t (131.5) =

-- 26 of 35 --

Autonomic and attentional pathways in the emergence of autism 	125
Table  Participant demographics of participants across lab vs. home-based data
collection.
Lab enrolled,
N = 
Home enrolled,
N = 
Test statistic
(p value)b
Child race
White-non-Hispanic 	26 (65%) 	51 (49.5%) 	0.257
Black or African American 	9 (22.5%) 	33 (32%)
More than one race 	3 (7.5%) 	12 (11.7%)
White-Hispanic 	1 (2.5%) 	4 (3.9%)
Asian 	0 (0%) 	3 (2.9%)
Other/Unknown 	1 (2.5%) 	0 (0%)
Child racea
Black, indigenous, and persons
of color (BIPOC)
14 (35%) 	52 (50.5%) 	0.139
White 	26 (65%) 	51 (49.5%)
Reported Primary Caregiver
Mother 	37 (92.5%) 	102 (99%) 	0.119
Father 	3 (7.5%) 	1 (1%)
Primar y Careg iver Educationa
High School/GED/some
college
12 (30%) 	47 (45.6%) 	0.129
Bachelor/Graduate/Professional
degree
28 (70%) 	56 (54.4%)
Not reported 	2 	0
Annual Household Income∗
<US$20,00–$60,000 	4 (11.1%) 	37 (40.7%) 	0.003
US$60,001 or higher 	32 (88.9%) 	54 (59.3%)
Not sure or prefer not to answer 	4 	12
Distance from the Lab
Average roundtrip mileage (SD) 	23 (22) 	73.5 (76.6) 	<0.001
a Dichotomized groups and chi squared analyses.
b Bold values indicate statistical significance at the p < .05 level.
-6.0, p < 0.001). Results from these analyses suggest that distance to the
lab stands as one of the barriers to lab-based participation and that offering
in-home study visits increases accessibility of research participation for
lower-resourced families.
Confirming that findings from controlled, lab-based experiments com-
pleted in the home are comparable to those completed in the lab, while
also demonstrating differences in infant behavior and sociodemographic
factors across the two contexts, underscores the feasibility and impact of
in-home study visits. To continue this work, we have developed a sophisti-
cated method using portable, synchronized technologies that can effectively

-- 27 of 35 --

126 	Jessica Bradshaw et al.
capture synchronous behavioral and physiological data without disrupting
the familial environment. By situating research in participants’ homes, with
advanced technology explicitly designed for our study procedures, we aim
to gain a deeper understanding of how early ASD markers manifest in nat-
uralistic settings and reduce barriers for families from diverse demographic
backgrounds.
8. Conclusions
The science of ASD in infancy is at an exciting stage, offering new
opportunities to elucidate the mechanisms and developmental cascades un-
derlying atypical neurodevelopment in real-word contexts. The naturalistic,
behavioral, and non-invasive nature of this work elevates its potential for
rapid translation to novel and, most importantly, actionable early detec-
tion and intervention strateg ies. By integ rating a developmental cascades
approach with prospective, longitudinal designs, innovative methodologies,
and home-based data collection, we can illuminate new pathways that
characterize early development of ASD. Grounded in both mechanistic
insights and real-world applicability, we can understand how autonomic
regulation and attentional processes shape developmental outcomes.
Pr ior itizing inclusivity and ecological validity through home-based data
collection not only broadens the scope of ASD research but also ensures
its relevance to the lived experiences of diverse families. This multifaceted
approach not only advances scientific understanding but also lays the
groundwork for interventions that resonate with the complexities of infant
development and with the cultural context of families traditionally under-
represented in research. As ASD research continues to evolve, bridging the-
ory, empirical findings, and methodological innovation will remain critical
to transform outcomes for children and their families.
References
Adamson, L. B., Bakeman, R., Deckner, D. F., & Romski, M. (2009). Joint engagement and the
emergence of language in children with autism and down syndrome. Journal of Autism
and Developmental Disorders, 39(1), 84–96. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803- 008- 0601- 7.
Adamson, L. B., Bakeman, R., Suma, K., & Robins, D. L. (2019). An expanded view of joint
attention: Skill, engagement, and language in typical development and autism. Child
Development, 90(1), e1–e18. https://doi.org/10.1111/cdev.12973.
Amer ican Psychiatr ic Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.).
Artoni, P., Piffer, A., Vinci, V., LeBlanc, J., Nelson, C. A., Hensch, T. K., & Fagiolini, M. (2020).
Deep learning of spontaneous arousal fluctuations detects early cholinergic defects across

-- 28 of 35 --

Autonomic and attentional pathways in the emergence of autism 	127
neurodevelopmental mouse models and patients. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 117(38), 23298–23303. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1820847116.
Bazhenova,O.V.,Plonskaia,O.,& Porges, S.W. (2001). Vagal reactivity and affective adjustment
in infants during interaction challenges. Child Development, 72(5), 1314–1326. https://
doi.org/10.1111/1467-8624.00350.
Bradshaw, J., & Abney, D. H. (2021). Infant physiological activity and the early emergence of
social communication. Developmental Psychobiology, 63(7). https://doi.org/10.1002/dev.
22145.
Bradshaw, J., Fu, X., & Richards, J. E. (2024). Infant sustained attention differs by context and
social content in the first 2 years of life. Developmental Science, 27(4). https://doi.org/10.
1111/desc.13500.
Bradshaw, J., Fu, X., Yurkovic-Harding, J., & Abney, D. (2023a). Infant embodied at-
tention in context: Feasibility of home-based head-mounted eye tracking in early
infancy. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2023.
101299.
Bradshaw, J., Klin, A., Evans, L., Klaiman, C., Saulnier, C., & McCracken, C. (2020a).
Development of attention from birth to 5 months in infants at risk for autism spec-
trum disorder. Development and Psychopathology, 32(2), 491–501. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0954579419000233.
Bradshaw, J., Klin, A., Evans, L., Klaiman, C., Saulnier, C., & McCracken, C. (2020b).
Development of attention from birth to 5 months in infants at risk for autism spec-
trum disorder. Development and Psychopathology, 32(2), 491–501. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0954579419000233.
Bradshaw, J., McCracken, C., Pileggi, M., Brane, N., Delehanty, A., Day, T., Federico, A.,
Klaiman, C., Saulnier, C., Klin, A., & Wetherby, A. (2021a). Early social communication
development in infants with autism spectrum disorder. Child Development, 92(6), 2224–
2234. https://doi.org/10.1111/cdev.13683.
Bradshaw, J., O’Reilly, C., Everhart, K. C., Dixon, E., Vinyard, A., Tavakoli, A., &
Dail, R. B. (2024). Neonatal autonomic regulation as a predictor of autism
symptoms in very preterm infants. Journal of Perinatology. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41372- 024- 01942- 2.
Bradshaw, J., Schwichtenberg, A. J., & Iverson, J. M. (2022a). Capturing the complexity of
autism: Applying a developmental cascades framework. Child Development Perspectives,
16(1), 18–26. https://doi.org/10.1111/cdep.12439.
Bradshaw, J., Shi, D., Federico, A., Klaiman, C., & Saulnier, C. (2023b). The Pull-to-Sit Task:
Examining infant postural development in autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Pediatrics,
253, 225–231. e2 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2022.09.047 .
Bradshaw, J.,Shi, D.,Hendrix, C.L.,Saulnier, C.,& Klaiman,C.(2021b).Neonatal neurobehav-
ior in infants with autism spectrum disorder. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology,
64(5), 600–607. https://doi.org/10.1111/dmcn.15096.
Bradshaw, J., Shic, F., Holden, A. N., Horowitz, E. J., Barrett, A. C., German, T. C., &
Vernon, T. W. (2019). The Use of Eye Tracking as a Biomarker of Treatment Outcome
in a Pilot Randomized Clinical Trial for Young Children with Autism. Autism Research,
12(5), 779–793. https://doi.org/10.1002/AUR.2093.
Bradshaw, J., Vinyard, A., Platt, E., & Abney, D. (2022b). Physiological Measures of Attention
and Arousal During Dyadic Interactions as Predictors of Social Communication and
ASD Symptoms. Multi-Level Dyadic Pathways Influence Infants’ Emotion Regulation across
Prenatal and Postnatal Development.
Brazelton, T. B., & Nugent, J. (2011). The Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale (4th ed.). Mac
Keith Press.

-- 29 of 35 --

128 	Jessica Bradshaw et al.
Chawarska, K.,Macari, S.,& Shic, F. (2013).Decreased spontaneous attention to social scenes in
6-month-old infants later diagnosed with autism spectrum disorders. Biological Psychiatry,
74(3), 195–203. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.11.022.
Cheng, Y. C., Huang, Y. C., & Huang, W. L. (2020a). Heart rate variability in individuals with
autism spectrum disorders: A meta-analysis, Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews (118,
pp. 463–471). Elsevier Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.08.007.
Cheng, Y. C., Huang, Y. C., & Huang, W. L. (2020b). Heart rate variability in individuals with
autism spectrum disorders: A meta-analysis. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 118,
463–471. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.08.007.
Colombo, J. (2001). The development of visual attention in infancy. Annual Review of
Psychology, 52, 337–367. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.52.1.337.
Constantino, J. N., Kennon-McGill, S., Weichselbaum, C., Marrus, N., Haider, A., Glowin-
ski, A. L., Gillespie, S., Klaiman, C., Klin, A., & Jones, W. (2017). Infant viewing of social
scenes is under genetic control and is atypical in autism. Nature, 547(7663), 340–344.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22999.
Conte, S., & Richards, J. E. (2021). Attention in early development. Oxford Research Encyclo-
pedia of Psychology.
Conway, L. J., Levickis, P. A., Mensah, F., Smith, J. A., Wake, M., & Reilly, S. (2018). The role
of joint engagement in the development of language in a community-derived sample of
slow-to-talk children. Journal of Child Language, 45(6), 1275–1293. https://doi.org/10.
1017/S030500091800017X.
Dawson, G., Rieder, A. D., & 	Johnson, M. H. (2023). Prediction 	of 	autism
in 	infants: 	progress 	and 	challenges. 	The 	Lancet 	Neurology, 	22(3), 	244–
254. 	https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474- 4422(22)00407- 0/ATTACHMENT/
9AA7738A- 517E- 409D- A4A7- 2438F0E60ABF/MMC1.PDF.
Dawson, G., Toth, K., Abbott, R., Osterling, J., Munson, J., Estes, A., & Liaw, J. (2004). Early
social attention impairments in autism: Social orienting, joint attention, and attention to
distress. Developmental Psychology, 40(2), 271–283. https://doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.
40.2.271.
Di Giorgio, E., Frasnelli, E., Rosa Salva, O., Maria Luisa, S., Puopolo, M., Tosoni, D., Simion, F.,
Vallortigara, G., Apicella, F., Gagliano, A., Guzzetta, A., Molteni, M., Persico, A., Pioggia, G.,
Valer i, G., & Vicar i, S. (2016a). Difference in Visual Social Predispositions Between
Newborns at Low- and High-risk for Autism. Scientific Reports, 6(1), 1–9. https://doi.
org/10.1038/srep26395.
Di Giorgio, E., Frasnelli, E., Rosa Salva, O., Maria Luisa, S., Puopolo, M., Tosoni, D., Simion, F.,
Vallortigara, G., Apicella, F., Gagliano, A., Guzzetta, A., Molteni, M., Persico, A., Pioggia, G.,
Valer i, G., & Vicar i, S. (2016b). Difference in visual social predispositions between
newborns at low-and high-risk for autism. Scientific Reports, 6. https://doi.org/10.1038/
srep26395.
Di Giorgio, E., Rosa-Salva, O., Frasnelli, E., Calcagnì, A., Lunghi, M., Scattoni, M. L., Simion, F.,
& Vallortigara, G. (2021). Abnormal visual attention to simple social stimuli in 4-month-
old infants at high risk for Autism. Scientific Reports,11(1),1–11. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598- 021- 95418- 4.
Dow, D., Guthrie, W., Stronach, S. T., & Wetherby, A. M. (2017). Psychometric analysis of the
Systematic Observation of Red Flags for autism spectrum disorder in toddlers. Autism,
21(3), 301–309. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361316636760.
Elsabbagh, M., Volein, A., Holmboe, K., Tucker, L., Csibra, G., Baron-Cohen, S., Bolton, P.,
Charman, T., Baird, G., & Johnson, M. H. (2009). Visual orienting in the early broader
autism phenotype: Disengagement and facilitation. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychi-
atry and Allied Disciplines, 50(5), 637–642. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.2008.
02051.x.
Fairchild, K., & Aschner, J. (2012). HeRO monitoring to reduce mortality in NICU patients.
Research and Reports in Neonatology, 65. https://doi.org/10.2147/r r n.s32570.

-- 30 of 35 --

Autonomic and attentional pathways in the emergence of autism 	129
Feldman, R. (2006). From biological rhythms to social rhythms: Physiological precursors of
mother-infant synchrony. Developmental Psychology, 42(1), 175–188. https://doi.org/10.
1037/0012-1649.42.1.175.
Frazier, T. W., Strauss, M., Klingemier, E., Zetzer, E., Hardan, A. Y., Eng, C., &
Youngstrom, E. A. (2017). A Meta-Analysis of Gaze Differences to Social and Nonsocial
Information Between Individuals With and Without Autism. Journal of the American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 56(7), 546–555. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
JAAC.2017.05.005.
Fu, X., Platt, E., Shic, F., & Bradshaw, J. (2024). Infant social attention associated with elevated
likelihood for autism spectrum disorder: A multi-method comparison. Journal of Autism
and Developmental Disorders. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803- 024- 06360- z.
Fyfe, K. L., Yiallourou, S. R., Wong, F. Y., Odoi, A., Walker, A. M., & Horne, R. S. C (2015).
The effect of gestational age at birth on post-term maturation of heart rate variability.
Sleep, 38(10), 1635–1644. https://doi.org/10.5665/sleep.5064.
Girod, S., Leerkes, E., Chen, Y., Buehler, C., Shriver, L., & Wideman, L. (2024). Latent profiles
of infant negative affect and respiratory sinus arrhythmia during the still-face paradigm:
The role of maternal sensitivity. Infant and Child Development. https://doi.org/10.1002/
icd.2532.
Haraldsdottir, K., Watson, A. M., Goss, K. N., Beshish, A. G., Pegelow, D. F., Palta, M.,
Tetri, L. H., Barton, G. P., Brix, M. D., Centanni, R. M., & Eldridge, M. W. (2018).
Impaired autonomic function in adolescents born preterm. Physiological Reports, 6(6).
https://doi.org/10.14814/phy2.13620.
Hazlett, H. C., Gu, H., Munsell, B. C., Kim, S. H., Styner, M., Wolff, J. J., Elison, J. T.,
Swanson, M. R., Zhu, H., Botteron, K. N., Collins, D. L., Constantino, J. N.,
Dager, S. R., Estes, A. M., Evans, A. C., Fonov, V. S., Gerig, G., Kostopoulos, P., McK-
instry, R. C., . . . Piven, J. (2017). Early brain development in infants at high risk for
autism spectrum disorder. Nature, 542(7641), 348–351. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature
21369.
Heilman, K. J., Bal, E., Bazhenova, O. V., & Porges, S. W. (2007). Respiratory sinus arrhythmia
and tympanic membrane compliance predict spontaneous eye gaze behaviors in young
children: A pilot study. Developmental Psychobiology, 49(5), 531–542. https://doi.org/10.
1002/dev.20237.
Hunnius, S. (2007). The early development of visual attention and its implications for social
and cognitive development. In C. von Hofsten, & K. Rosander (Eds.), Progress in Brain
Research (164, pp. 187–209). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079- 6123(07)64010- 2.
Iverson, J. M., West, K. L., Schneider, J. L., Plate, S. N., Northrup, J. B., & Roemer
Britsch, E. (2023). Early development in autism: How developmental cascades help us
understand the emergence of developmental differences, Advances in Child Development
and Behavior (64, pp. 109–134). Academic Press Inc. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.acdb.
2022.10.005.
Jones, E. J. H., Venema, K., Earl, R., Lowy, R., Barnes, K., Estes, A., Dawson, G., &
Webb, S. J. (2016). Reduced engagement with social stimuli in 6-month-old infants
with later autism spectrum disorder: A longitudinal prospective study of infants at
high familial risk. Journal of Neurodevelopmental Disorders, 8(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/
s11689- 016- 9139- 8.
Jones, W., & Klin, A. (2013). Attention to eyes is present but in decline in 2-6-month-
old infants later diagnosed with autism. Nature, 504(7480), 427–431. https://doi.org/
10.1038/nature12715.
Kaliukhovich, D. A., Manyakov, N. V., Bangerter, A., Ness, S., Skalkin, A., Goodwin, M. S.,
Dawson, G., Hendren, R. L., Leventhal, B., Hudac, C. M., Bradshaw, J., Shic, F., &
Pandina, G. (2020). Social attention to activities in children and adults with autism
spectrum disorder: effects of context and age. Molecular Autism, 11(1), 1–14. https:
//doi.org/10.1186/S13229- 020- 00388- 5.

-- 31 of 35 --

130 	Jessica Bradshaw et al.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1998). Development itself is the key to understanding developmental
disorders. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2(10), 389–398.
Kennedy, D. P., D’Onofrio, B. M., Quinn, P. D., Bölte, S., Lichtenstein, P., & Falck-Ytter, T
(2017). Genetic Influence on Eye Movements to Complex Scenes at Short Timescales.
Current Biology, 27(22), 3554–3560. e3 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.10.007 .
Knobel-Dail, R. B., Sloane, R., Holditch-Davis, D., & Tanaka, D. T. (2017). Negative temper-
ature differential in preterm infants less than 29 weeks gestational age: Associations with
infection and maternal smoking. Nursing Research, 66(6), 442–453. https://doi.org/10.
1097/NNR.0000000000000250.
Landa, R. J., Holman, K. C., & Garrett-Mayer, E. (2007). Social and communication develop-
ment in toddlers with early and later diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders. Arch Gen
Psychiatry, 7(64), 853–864. https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.64.7.853.
Leekam, S. R., & Ramsden, C. A. H. (2006). Dyadic orienting and joint attention in preschool
children with autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 36(2), 185–197. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s10803- 005- 0054- 1.
Leppänen, J. M. (2016). Using eye tracking to understand infants’ attentional bias for faces.
Child Development Perspectives, 10(3), 161–165. https://doi.org/10.1111/cdep.12180.
Lester, B. M., Boukydis, C. F. Z., & Lagasse, L. (1996). Cardiorespiratory reactivity during the
Brazelton scale in term and preterm infants. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 21(6), 771–783.
https://academic.oup.com/jpepsy/article/21/6/771/908977.
Masten, A.S.,& Cicchetti, D.(2010). Developmental cascades. Development and Psychopathology,
22(3), 491–495. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954579410000222.
Mathewson, K. J., Van Lieshout, R. J., Saigal, S., Boyle, M. H., & Schmidt, L. A. (2014). Reduced
respiratory sinus arrhythmia in adults born at extremely low birth weight: Evidence of
premature parasympathetic decline? International Journal of Psychophysiology, 93(2), 198–
203. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2014.04.005.
Messinger, D., Young, G. S., Ozonoff, S., Dobkins, K., Carter, A., Zwaigenbaum, L., Landa, R. J.,
Charman, T., Stone, W. L., Constantino, J. N., Hutman, T., Carver, L. J., Bryson, S., Iver-
son,J. M.,Strauss, M.S.,Rogers,S.J.,& Sigman,M.(2013).Beyond autism:A Baby Siblings
Research Consortium study of high-risk children at three years of age. J. Am. Acad. Child
Adolesc. Psychiatry, 52(3), 300–308. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2012.12.011.
Mulkey, S. B., & dú Plessis, A. (2018). The critical role of the central autonomic nervous
system in fetal-neonatal transition. Seminars in Pediatric Neurology, 28, 29–37. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.spen.2018.05.004.
Murias, M., Major, S., Davlantis, K., Franz, L., Harris, A., Rardin, B., Sabatos-DeVito, M., &
Dawson, G. (2018). Validation of eye-tracking measures of social attention as a potential
biomarker for autism clinical trials. Autism Research, 11(1), 166–174. https://doi.org/10.
1002/aur.1894.
Naber, F. B. A., Swinkels, S. H. N., Buitelaar, J. K., Dietz, C., Van Daalen, E., Bakermans-
Kranenburg, M. J., Van IJzendoorn, M. H., & Van Engeland, H. (2007). Joint attention
and attachment in toddlers with autism. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 35(6), 899–
911. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10802- 007- 9142- 3.
Ness, S. L., Bangerter, A., Manyakov, N. V., Lewin, D., Boice, M., Skalkin, A., Jagannatha, S.,
Chatterjee, M., Dawson, G., Goodwin, M. S., Hendren, R., Leventhal, B., Shic, F., Fra-
zier, J. A., Janvier, Y., King, B. H., Miller, J. S., Smith, C. J., Tobe, R. H., & Pandina, G. (2019).
An Observational Study With the Janssen Autism Knowledge Engine (JAKE®) in
Individuals With Autism Spectrum Disorder. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 0(FEB), 111. https:
//doi.org/10.3389/FNINS.2019.00111.
Nyström, P., Thorup, E., Bölte, S., & Falck-Ytter, T. (2019). Joint attention in infancy and
the emergence of autism. Biological Psychiatry, 86(8), 631–638. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biopsych.2019.05.006.

-- 32 of 35 --

Autonomic and attentional pathways in the emergence of autism 	131
Oakes, L. M., & Rakison, D. H. (2019). Developmental Cascades: A New Framework to
Understand Change. Developmental Cascades: Building the Infant Mind. Oxford Academic.
Ozonoff, S., & Iosif , A. M. (2019). Changing conceptualizations of regression: What
prospective studies reveal about the onset of autism spectrum disorder. Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews, 100, 296–304. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.03.012.
Ozonoff, S., Young, G. S., Bradshaw, J., Charman, T., Chawarska, K., Iverson, J. M., Klaiman, C.,
Landa, R. J., Mcdonald, N., Messinger, D., Schmidt, R. J., Wilkinson, C. L., & Zwaigen-
baum, L. (2024). Familial recurrence of autism: Updates from the Baby Siblings Research
Consortium. Pediatrics, 2(154). https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2023-065297/1676681/
peds.2023-065297.pdf .
Ozonoff, S., Young, G. S., Carter, A., Messinger, D., Yirmiya, N., Zwaigenbaum, L., Bryson, S.,
Carver, L. J., Constantino, J. N., Dobkins, K., Hutman, T., Iverson, J. M., Landa, R.,
Rogers, S. J., Sigman, M., & Stone, W. L. (2011). Recurrence risk for autism spectrum
disorders:A Baby Siblings Research Consortium Study.Pediatrics,128,e488–e495.http://
publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/128/3/e488/844109/zpe0091100e488.pdf .
Patriquin, M. A., Lorenzi, J., Scarpa, A., & Bell, M. A. (2014). Developmental trajectories
of respiratory sinus arrhythmia: Associations with social responsiveness. Developmental
Psychobiology, 56(3), 317–326. https://doi.org/10.1002/dev.21100.
Peltola, M. J., Yrttiaho, S., & Leppänen, J. M. (2018). Infants’ attention bias to faces as an early
marker of social development. Developmental Science,21(6). https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.
12687.
Pierce, K., Marinero, S., Hazin, R., McKenna, B., Barnes, C. C., & Malige, A. (2016). Eye
tracking reveals abnormal visual preference for geometric images as an early biomarker
of an autism spectrum disorder subtype associated with increased symptom severity.
Biological Psychiatry, 79(8), 657–666. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.03.032.
Pileggi, M. L., Brane, N., Bradshaw, J., Delehanty, A., Day, T., McCracken, C., Stapel-Wax, J.,
& Wetherby, A. M. (2021). Early observation of red flags in 12-month-old infant
siblings later diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder.American Journal of Speech-Language
Pathology, 30(4), 1846–1855. https://doi.org/10.1044/2020_AJSLP- 20- 00165.
Porges, S. W. (2003). The Polyvagal Theory: Phylogenetic contributions to social behav-
ior. Physiology and Behavior, 79(3), 503–513. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0031-9384(03)
00156-2.
Porges, S. W., Doussard-Roosevelt, J. A., Portales, A. L., & Greenspan, S. I. (1996). Infant
regulation of the vagal ‘brake’predicts child behavior problems:A psychobiological model
of social behavior. Developmental Psychobiology, 29(8), 697–712. https://doi.org/10.1002/
(SICI)1098- 2302(199612)29:8〈697::AID- DEV5〉3.0.CO;2- O.
Porges, S. W., & Furman, S. A. (2011). The early development of the autonomic nervous
system provides a neural platform for social behaviour: A polyvagal perspective. Infant
and Child Development, 20(1), 106–118. https://doi.org/10.1002/icd.688.
Propper, C. (2012). The Early Development of Vagal Tone: Effects of Poverty and Elevated
Contextual Risk. In R. King, & V. Maholmes (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Poverty
and Child Development (pp. 1–768). Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/
oxfordhb/9780199769100.001.0001.
Reynolds, G. D., Guy, M. W., & Zhang, D. (2011). Neural correlates of individual differences
in infant visual attention and recognition memory. Infancy, 16(4), 368–391. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1532-7078.2010.00060.x.
Reynolds, G. D., & Richards, J. E. (2005). Familiarization, attention, and recognition memory
in infancy: An event-related potential and cortical source localization study. Dev Psychol,
41(4), 598–615.
Reynolds, G. D., & Roth, K. C. (2018). The development of attentional biases for faces in
infancy: A developmental systems perspective. Frontiers in Psychology, 9. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00222.

-- 33 of 35 --

132 	Jessica Bradshaw et al.
Richards, J. E. (2004). The development of sustained attention in infants. In M. I. Posner (Ed.),
Cognitive Neuroscience of Attention (pp. 342–356). Guilford Press.
Richards, J. E. (2010). The development of attention to simple and complex visual stimuli in
infants: Behavioral and psychophysiological measures. Developmental Review, 30(2), 203–
219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dr.2010.03.005.
Richards, J. E., & Anderson, D. R. (2004). Attentional inertia in children’s extended looking at
television. In R. V. Kail (Ed.),Advances in Child Development and Behavior (32,pp.163–212).
JAI. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065- 2407(04)80007- 7.
Richards, J. E., & Casey, B. J. (1992). The development of sustained visual attention in human
infants. In B. Campbell, H. Hayne, & R. Richardson (Eds.), Information processing in infants
and adults: Perspectives from human and animal research. Erlbaum Press.
Richards, J. E., & Hunter, S. K. (1998). Attention and eye movement in young infants. Neural
Control and Development (1st ed., p. 32). Psychology Press.
Richards, J. E., & Turner, E. D. (2001). Extended visual fixation and distractibility in children
from six to twenty-four months of age. Child Development, 72(4), 963–972. https://doi.
org/10.1111/1467-8624.00328.
Sheinkopf, S. J., Levine, T. P., McCormick, C. E. B., Puggioni, G., Conradt, E., Lagasse, L. L.,
& Lester, B. M. (2019). Developmental trajectories of autonomic functioning in autism
from birth to early childhood. Biological Psychology, 142, 13–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biopsycho.2019.01.003.
Steinbrenner, J. R., McIntyre, N., Rentschler, L. F., Pearson, J. N., Luelmo, P., Jaramillo, M. E.,
Boyd, B. A., Wong, C., Nowell, S. W., Odom, S. L., & Hume, K. A. (2022). Patterns in
reporting and participant inclusion related to race and ethnicity in autism intervention
literature: Data from a large-scale systematic review of evidence-based practices. Autism,
26(8), 2026–2040. https://doi.org/10.1177/13623613211072593.
Szatmari, P., Chawarska, K., Dawson, G., Georgiades, S., Landa, R., Lord, C., Messinger, D. S.,
Thurm, A., & Halladay, A. (2016). Prospective longitudinal studies of infant siblings of
children with autism: Lessons learned and future directions. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry, 55(3), 179–187. www.jaacap.org.
Tamis-LeMonda, C. S., Swirbul, M. S., & Lai, K. H. (2024). Natural behavior in everyday
settings. Advances in Child Development and Behavior, 66, 1–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/
BS.ACDB.2024.04.001.
Thayer, J. F., Hansen, A. L., Saus-Rose, E., & Johnsen, B. H. (2009). Heart rate variability,
prefrontal neural function, and cognitive performance: The neurovisceral integration
perspective on self-regulation, adaptation, and health. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 37(2),
141–153. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12160- 009- 9101- z.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1995). A Dynamic Systems Approach to the Development of
Cognition and Action. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience: 7 (4th ed.) https://doi.org/10.
1162/jocn.1995.7.4.512.
Thorp, D. M. (2006). Joint engagement and language development: Contributions of mother and infant.
University of Miama.
Warreyn, P., Roeyers, H., Van Wetswinkel, U., & De Groote, I. (2007). Temporal coor-
dination of joint attention behavior in preschoolers with autism spectrum disorder.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 37(3), 501–512. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10803- 006- 0184- 0.
Whedon, M., Perry, N. B., Calkins, S. D., & Bell, M. A. (2018). Cardiac vagal regulation in
infancy predicts executive function and social competence in preschool: Indirect effects
through language. Developmental Psychobiology, 60(5), 595–607. https://doi.org/10.1002/
dev.21636.
Xie, W. (2017). Development of Brain Functional Connectivity and Its Relation To Infant Sustained
Attention In The First Year Of Life. https://scholarcommons.sc.edu/etd

-- 34 of 35 --

Autonomic and attentional pathways in the emergence of autism 	133
Xie, W., & Richards, J. E. (2016). Effects of interstimulus intervals on behavioral, heart
rate, and event-related potential indices of infant engagement and sustained attention.
Psychophysiology, 53(8), 1128–1142. https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.12670.
Yurkovic-Harding, J., Lisandrelli, G., Shaffer, R. C., Dominick, K. C., Pedapati, E. V., Erick-
son, C. A., Yu, C., & Kennedy, D. P. (2022). Children with ASD establish joint attention
during free-flowing toy play without face looks. Current Biology, 32(12), 2739–2746. e4
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2022.04.044 .
Zwaigenbaum, L., Bauman, M. L., Stone, W. L., Yirmiya, N., Estes, A., Hansen, R. L.,
McPartland, J. C., Natowicz, M. R., Choueiri, R., Fein, D., Kasari, C., Pierce, K., Buie, T.,
Carter, A., Davis, P. A., Granpeesheh, D., Mailloux, Z., Newschaffer, C., Robins, D., . . .
Wetherby, A. (2015). Early identification of autism spectrum disorder: Recommenda-
tions for practice and research. Pediatrics, 136. http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/
article-pdf/136/Supplement_1/S10/895992/peds_2014-3667c.pdf .
Zwaigenbaum, L., Bryson, S., Rogers, T., Roberts, W., Brian, J., & Szatmari, P. (2005). Behav-
ioral manifestations of autism in the first year of life. International Journal of Developmental
Neuroscience, 23(2-3 SPEC. ISS), 143–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2004.05.
001.

-- 35 of 35 --

