SIGNIFICANCE
Earlier Intervention Necessitates Earlier Identification
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a lifelong condition that affects ~2.3% of the population and carries a lifelong
financial cost of $1.4-2.4 million per individual, thus representing a pressing public health challenge 29,30. Early
intervention plays a pivotal role in the lives of children and families affected by ASD – improving functional
outcomes for the individual, enhancing the quality of life for the family, and reducing a lifelong financial cost 31,32.
Unfortunately, with ASD diagnosis and therefore intervention onset occurring after age 4-6 years 33,34, we are
missing out on critical periods of early intervention that could capitalize on peak neuroplasticity within the first 2
years of life 35–37. This is a critical barrier in the field–earlier identification of ASD within the first year of life can
catalyze the onset of very early intervention, leading to greater improvements in long-term outcomes. Addressing
this critical barrier by identifying the earliest point of developmental divergence in ASD is a high priority.
The search for biological and behavioral markers of ASD has resulted in increased understanding of altered
neurodevelopmental pathways, and atypical attention is among the most promising biomarkers that persists
across the lifespan 38–42 . Research on infant attention suggests that infants with ASD exhibit reduced neonatal
attention 6,43 , diminished social monitoring 44,45, disrupted engagement of social sustained attention 46, and a
developmental decline in eye-looking 7, all prior to diagnosis. Still, this evidence is limited to behavioral
studies of attention, and few extend to earlier than 2-3 months of age. To advance our understanding of
disrupted attention in ASD, there is a need to examine specific biological substrates associated with this
developmentally persistent phenotypic feature. The timing and context-specificity of attention differences
measured 	at 	multiple 	levels 	(e.g., 	behavioral, 	physiological) 	in 	early 	development 	may 	reveal 	key
neurodevelopmental mechanisms in ASD. This project takes the critical next step in examining biological
underpinnings of disrupted attention in ASD by testing whether reduced autonomic regulation of attention
(“heart defined attention”) is a key early-emerging feature associated with ASD. Significantly, this work will:
1. Advance current etiological theories of ASD that link, with heightened specificity, an established, lifelong
cardinal feature of ASD – atypical attention – to autonomic regulation of attention in the first months of life.
2. Pave the way for new developmental models of ASD wherein disrupted attention has proximal effects on
interactive behavior that interferes with learning and has distal, cascading effects on long-term outcomes.
3. Lead to the development of new models for earlier intervention that enrich early experiences and
enhance learning opportunities from the first months of life, ultimately reducing lifelong costs and improving
lifelong outcomes for individuals with ASD.
There is an urgent need to test specific mechanistic hypotheses about precisely when attention patterns
diverge in ASD, the neurobiological systems implicated in this disruption, and the in-the-moment
influence of attention on interactive behaviors in infancy, prior to the emergence of symptoms.
The First Three Months: A Critical Period of Neurodevelopment and Autonomic Maturation
The brain undergoes faster structural and functional maturation, as well as significant cross-domain integration,
from birth to 3 months of age than at any other postnatal time 47. From birth, the autonomic nervous system (ANS)
plays a vital role in the adaptive competence of the newborn. ANS has two major component systems:
sympathetic 	(“fight 	or 	flight”) 	and 	parasympathetic 	(“rest 	and 	digest”). 	In 	response 	to 	ever-changing
environmental contexts, these systems enact physiological changes that regulate basic functions, such as heart
rate and respiration. In early prenatal development, physiological functions are driven primarily by sympathetic
influence. Higher cortical processes begin to integrate autonomic control in the late prenatal and early postnatal
period leading to increasing influence of the parasympathetic system. As ANS matures, parasympathetic tone
serves as the foundation for several higher-level behaviors that support calm states of alertness and sustained
attention to people and objects, ultimately providing countless opportunities for social and language learning. In
this way, ANS is considered a “developmental resource” in the neonatal and early infant period that mediates
infant-environment interactions 11. While some neurodevelopmental models of ASD suggest atypical emergence
of cortically-driven endogenous attention systems 48, the developmental course of parasympathetic influence
on attention in ASD has never been investigated, representing a clear scientific gap to be filled 9,48,49,11. Current
evidence that forms the scientific basis of this study includes: 1a) very early disrupted attention, measured
behaviorally, in ASD, 1b) an ANS-regulated marker of attention that is well-studied in TDs, but not ASD, 2) a
developmental profile of PT infants who experience very early ANS dysregulation, but not ASD (in most cases),
and 3) some evidence of a dynamic, temporally coordinated, ANS-attention-behavioral system in TDs, but less
in ASD. This strong scientific foundation (described in further detail below) calls for further research on the
“physiological phenomena” of attention 49 and presents three specific gaps in prior research that prevent a full
understanding of the role of autonomic regulation in atypical attention in ASD: (1) The maturational course of

-- 1 of 12 --

autonomically regulated attention and baseline autonomic functioning as it emerges within the first three months
of life for infants at elevated genetic likelihood for ASD remains unknown. (2) The developmental course of (and
relations between) autonomically regulated attention, baseline autonomic functioning, and ASD symptomology
in infants who are born with baseline ANS dysfunction (PTs) has not been delineated. (3) The dynamic role of
HDA in supporting interactive behavior, moment-by-moment, is entirely unexplored. These gaps have prevented
our ability to test a full model of ASD wherein early autonomic dysregulation of attention within the first months
of life has cascading effects on interactive behavior and the emergence of ASD symptoms. Examining this novel
mechanistic hypothesis while capitalizing on an especially critical period of rapid neurodevelopment (1-3mos)
will advance scientific knowledge of ASD pathogenesis, ultimately paving the way for novel paradigms of very
early interventions.
1. Autonomic Regulation of Attention: A Critical Opportunity for
ASD 	Research. 	Autonomic 	regulation 	and 	attention 	are 	critical
components of an adaptive engagement system that selects relevant
features of the environment and creates rich opportunities for learning and
social interaction 10. ANS serves a regulatory function in attention by
modulating 	heart 	rate 	responses 	during 	periods 	of 	attention 	and
information processing. In a healthy ANS-mediated attention system, a
neonate 	overrides 	metabolic 	demands 	to 	generate 	a 	physiological
response (heart rate deceleration) that facilitates and enhances attention
and 	stimulus 	intake50. 	This 	parasympathetically-driven 	physiological
response, termed here heart defined attention (HDA), 51 is characterized by 3 discrete attention phases (Fig 1)
that are associated with cognitive and learning processes 52. Some
argue that HDA indices are more precise measures of information
processing than looking time alone 53–55 . Limited studies of infants later
diagnosed 	with 	ASD 	show 	atypical 	behavioral 	measures 	of
attention 7,43,56 in very early infancy (see PI’s work, Fig 2) 57 as well as
atypical general autonomic functioning in later infancy 58,59, pointing to
the possibility of autonomically-driven dysregulation of attention. Our
pilot work, and that of others, show differences in HDA quantity
(%SA: %time in heart-defined sustained attention) and quality (HR-
decel: magnitude of heart rate deceleration; Fig 1) in infant siblings of
children with autism (ASIBs) 24,49 (see Fig 4 below).
2. Preterm (PT) Infants as a Model of Global ANS Dysfunction. Significant ANS maturation occurs in
the second half of pregnancy, and preterm birth (born <37w gestation) significantly disrupts ANS development
and the overall functioning of the PT newborn 60. For PTs, reduced ANS activity fails to normalize at term age
equivalent 25,61 and may alter long-term temporal programming of ANS maturation 62. While the vast majority of
PTs experience prolonged global ANS dysfunction, only a small minority of PTs develop ASD (7% in PTs vs.
20% in ASIBs)16,17. Thus, inclusion of PTs as a model for global ANS dysfunction in this study allows for
heightened precision and specificity in delineating the link between attention-specific ANS dysfunction (i.e., HDA)
and ASD symptoms. Systematic, longitudinal examination of autonomic measures of attention (HDA) in
infants with elevated liability for ASD (ASIBs) contrasted to PT and TD control groups is necessary to test
our mechanistic hypothesis that disrupted autonomic regulation specific to attention (vs. global ANS dysfunction
observed in PTs and measured in this study) carries critical consequences for learning and development 63 and
is associated with ASD symptoms. Measurement of general, baseline autonomic function in addition to attention-
specific autonomic regulation, as proposed in this study, will clearly show how autonomic regulation of attention
differs across ASIBs, PTs, and TDs.
3. Modeling Autonomic, Attentional, and Behavioral Dynamics in ASD. A healthy, regulated autonomic
and attention system creates rich opportunities for learning and social interaction 10. After the third month of life,
a newly emerging, cortically driven organization of behavior results in anticipation and preparation for interactions
with people and objects. The dynamic coordination of autonomic arousal and attention affords calm states of
alertness, an optimal context for learning 64. Quantification of the dynamics of this system65 can reveal how
autonomic regulation of attention is associated with, and may even predict, interactive behaviors as they unfold,
moment-by-moment, in infancy. Autonomic arousal can index “anticipatory readiness” for dynamic changes in
attention and behavior 66,67 . Emerging research in ASD suggests unique patterns of ongoing physiological activity
and attention during social tasks 68,69, however, there is a significant lack of data on temporal dynamics of
HDA and ongoing behaviors70 in ASIBs in infancy as symptoms of ASD begin to unfold. Such ANS-driven
Figure 1. Heart defined attention phases and
proposed DVs: %SA, HR-decel
heart rate
deceleration
(HR-decel)
%time in
sustained attention
(%SA)
(2)
Sustained
Attention
(1)
Attention
Orienting
(3)
Attention
Termination
Figure 2. Infant attention scored from NICU
Network Neurobehavioral (NNNS) exam. Higher
score indiciates better performance.

-- 2 of 12 --

dynamics could facilitate ongoing social engagement, which may help to guide ongoing interactive behavior, and
ultimately increase opportunities for learning. The proposed study will fill this gap with an analysis of temporal
dynamics of infant gaze, heart rate changes, and behavior during naturalistic interactions between age 6-12
months across ASIBs, PTs, and TDs. Critically, the direct link from physiology (heart-defined attention) to in-
the-moment interactive behavior will enable translation of findings to pilot behavioral interventions and explore
biofeedback tools 19,71,72 to directly target the quality and quantity of infant HDA during interactions.
Model of ANS-Regulated Attention and ASD
Based on current literature and our preliminary data, we propose a model of ASD wherein initial global ANS
(primarily sympathetic) function supporting neonatal arousal and reactivity is intact at birth. Yet, subsequently
emerging parasympathetic regulation of attention is disrupted. This disruption emerges over the first year of life
and interferes with infant sustained attention and ensuing behavior, leading to decreased learning, especially
social learning, opportunities, and increased ASD symptoms. Expected Outcomes by Group (see Fig 3):
ASIBs, who have no/low global ANS dysfunction at birth (Fig 3a), will show emerging ANS dysregulation of
attention over the first year (attenuated HDA from 1-3m, weakening HDA-behavior associations from 6-12m; Fig
3b) leading to elevated ASD symptoms at
age 3 (Fig 3c). PTs, who do have global
ANS dysfunction at birth (Fig 3a), should
show gradual improvement in HDA (1-3m)
and HDA-behavior associations (6-12m),
ultimately resulting in low ASD symptoms at
age 3. The rate of ASD in PTs is higher than
that 	of 	the 	general 	population, 	and 	we
hypothesize that a small subset of PTs with
elevated ASD symptoms at outcome will
show both disrupted global ANS and ANS-
dysregulated attention in early infancy. TDs
(no 	global 	ANS 	dysfunction) 	will 	show
no/low ANS dysregulation of attention and
low ASD symptoms at age 3.
Translation of Findings to Non-invasive Biomarkers of the ASD Phenotype
Early intervention plays a pivotal role in the lives of children and families affected by ASD – improving functional
outcomes for the child, enhancing quality of life for the family, and reducing lifelong financial burden 73. Very early
onset of intervention enhances child gains, which has prompted the PI and others to develop and pilot
interventions for at-risk infants, some as young as 6 months31,74–77. The nascent, but rapid, progress in the
development of very early interventions demands innovative studies to identify early markers of social
functioning. Offering intervention to all infants with genetic or congenital risk is likely not feasible. But a valid,
cost-effective, non-invasive biomarker can help identify those who have the greatest likelihood of developing
social-communication challenges and ASD, and thus are in greatest need. In a landmark study, Jones and Klin
(2013) 7 identified altered trajectories of social attention (2-6 months) as the earliest known predictor of ASD.
However, this exceptional study did not evaluate potential biological mechanisms underlying such an early
disruption. Aim 3 of this project will leverage machine learning to test autonomic and attentional features from
1-12 	months
(Aims 	1-2) 	as
viable biomarkers
of ASD symptoms.
Notably, Aim 3 is
not contingent on
significant 	results
from Aims 1-2 as
statistical
significance is not
a 	requisite 	for
including 	these
variables 	in
feature 	selection
Figure 3. Driving framework for expected outcomes to be tested (b) and (c) given
initial global ANS function/dysfunction at birth (a). ANS dysregulation of attention
(b) will be measured measured early (1-3 months) via heart defined sustained
attention (%time in sustained attention, HR deceleration). ANS dysregulation of
attention will be measured later (6-12 months) via HDA-behavior associations.
Study Visits (participant age in months) Note: 24-month remote time point not depicted
Heart
Defined
Attention
Heart
Defined
Attention
Heart
Defined
Attention
Full set of features
Feature
Identification
Feature Extraction ASD Symptoms
at Outcome
Aim 1
Maturation of autonomic
regulation of attention across
ASIBs, PTs, and TDs
Aim 2
Temporal dynamics of physiology,
attention, and interactive behavior
across ASIBs, PTs, and TDs
Aim 3
Predicting ASD symptoms from
autonomic and attentional
features from ASIBs, PTs, and TDs
6 	9 	12	1 	2 	3 	36
Early Predictive Features
(“Biomarkers
”)
Heart
Defined
Interactive
Behavior
Defined
A�en�on
Interactive
Behavior
Interactive
Behavior
Heart
Defined
Attention

-- 3 of 12 --

procedures. See study overview above.
The proposed research will have a significant impact on the broader understanding of ASD by utilizing an
innovative, developmentally informed framework: autonomic regulation of attention 78. We will generate linkages
from ANS and attention to moment-by-moment infant behavior and utilize advanced analytic methods to predict
ASD symptoms years later. The prior research and our preliminary data (see Prelim. Data below) provide support
for the overall study premise to identify disrupted autonomic regulation of attention as an early indicator of ASD.
The potential for translation of findings to actionable interventions is high; promising studies of behavioral
interventions for PT infants show positive maturational shifts of autonomic regulation 79, suggesting malleability
of this early-developing system. Developmentally informed interventions that target this rapidly maturing
autonomic system of attention have the potential to make significant, sustained changes in attention, cognitive,
and social outcomes for infants with an elevated likelihood for ASD.
INNOVATION
This proposal seeks to shift current research paradigms by studying novel indices of attention across three
unique infant groups using advanced modeling of dynamic, moment-by-moment, behavior in the first year of life.
Attention as an Autonomically-Regulated Process and Predictor of ASD. Atypical attention has been among
the most promising early markers of ASD38,80, but the biological underpinnings of disrupted infant attention in
ASD is currently unknown. This proposal will utilize an innovative, physiological measure of attention (HDA) in
addition to a baseline autonomic marker (respiratory sinus arrhythmia, RSA) to test the hypothesis that disrupted
attention is linked specifically to altered ANS-regulated attention and is associated with later-emerging ASD
symptoms. Repeated measurement of RSA and of HDA across interactive contexts from the first months of life
is an innovative approach that will provide an enriched dataset more powerful than previous studies. This
innovation will allow us to understand mechanisms and roles of ANS and attention in the unfolding of ASD.
Preterm Infants: Controlling for Global ANS Dysfunction. PT infants are born with an exceptionally immature
autonomic regulatory system that may not fully develop until well after birth 13,81–83. Yet, the vast majority of PTs
ultimately experience typical outcomes (~80-92% of PTs do not have ASD or developmental delays by preschool
age 84,85). Thus, PT infants serve as a unique control group that experience early autonomic dysfunction and
mostly typical, non-ASD outcomes. Measures of HDA and baseline RSA within this innovative three-group
research design will allow us to delineate: 1) how global ANS dysfunction (in PTs) differs from autonomic
dysfunction specific to attention (in ASIBs) and 2) how maturation and improvements in ANS over the first year
of life for PTs may support interactive behavior and learning, potentially buffering against ASD-specific outcomes.
Moment-by-Moment Measures of a Dynamic, Interactive System. Dynamic biological rhythms are central to
the development of the infant 9. Physiological and social maturation are dynamic processes, and variability within
this system during critical neurodevelopmental windows may predict later functioning 9,86. This proposal examines
novel questions of how physiological correlates of attention (i.e., HDA) relate to infant interactive behavior. By
measuring HDA during live interactions with people and objects, we will explore the dynamics of attention,
physiology, and behavior in an integrated way that has never been done before. Aim 2 will capture this
integration, generating a rich dataset that can inform the development of interventions.
APPROACH
Key empirical support for the proposed project include the PI and investigative team’s preliminary data and
previous research on disrupted attention in infants who later develop ASD 6,44,45,48,87–89. However, prior research
has been largely limited to behavioral measurement of attention in contrived experimental contexts (e.g., eye
tracking) in later infancy (after 3-6 months). Moreover, very few studies have directly compared ANS or attention
in ASIBs and PTs. And no studies have examined the temporal dynamics of autonomic regulation of attention
and interactive behavior in these groups. These issues limit advancement of etiological theories of ASD and
implications for treatment. This proposal details specific plans to address the gaps in prior research.
Research Team. The project PI (Bradshaw) has >14 years of experience conducting research in largescale,
NIH-funded, interdisciplinary, autism centers (Yale Child Study Center, UCSB, UCSD, Emory), resulting in 40
publications. As an early-stage investigator (ESI), the PI is currently leading two NIH-funded studies (K23, R21),
one Foundation award (James S. McDonnell Foundation), and two internally funded pilot studies. In the proposed
project, the PI will be supported by five Co-Is and one psychologist (below), four of whom are senior investigators
with an established track record of grants management (R01s) and successful mentorship of and collaboration
with ESIs. In addition to regular individual meetings between the PI and Co-Is, regular meetings with the full
investigative team (PI+Co-Is) will occur at key points throughout the project (>3x/year) to troubleshoot issues
and think through larger project questions and plans from multiple perspectives. Jane Roberts (expertise in

-- 4 of 12 --

autonomic dysfunction in ASD/Fragile X; primary mentor for PI’s K23) has significant grants management
experience and publications with the PI 90. John Richards (co-mentor on PI’s K23, collaborator on internal pilot
grant) developed the theoretical model of heart-defined attention 52,91 and has led an R01 for >40 years focused
on this model of infant attention in TD and PT infants. Robin Dail (expert in ANS in PT infants, collaborator on
internal pilot grant) is leading a multisite R01 with PT infants in NICUs across North/South Carolina. Her expertise
is critical for understanding ANS maturation in the context of PT birth and heightened medical morbidities. The
PI’s collaborative conceptual work with Jana Iverson8 (expertise in TD and ASIB infant motor/communication
development) on developmental cascades in ASD has led to the novel questions proposed in this study.
Christian O’Reilly (expertise in computational modeling, early biomarkers, and signal processing) has worked
with the PI using machine learning to predict ASD likelihood from heart activity (preliminary data for Aim 3).
Finally, a licensed Clinical Psychologist with expertise in developmental psychology and autism (Dr. Emily
Neger) will assist the PI with clinical training, supervision, reliability monitoring, and expert clinical judgements.
The unique, complementary areas of expertise among the investigative team, along with diversity across stage
of career and discipline, will enhance diverse perspectives, enrich expertise, foster ingenuity, and result in
successful achievement of scientific aims.
PRELIMINARY DATA
ASD-Specific Differences in Behavioral Measures of Early Infant Attention. In the neonatal period, attention
to the environment occurs during calm states of alertness, facilitated by optimal levels of autonomic regulation.
Our recent set of studies (P50MH100029) 6,57 investigated behavioral measures of attention in 1-3-month-old
ASIBs who later developed ASD. We identified specific timepoints, between 2-3 months of age, when maturation
of attention in ASD (n=18) and ASIBs (n=41) lagged compared to TDs (n=39; Fig 2, above). These preliminary
data highlight feasibility in recruitment and measurement of attention in neonates and quantifiable
differences in behavioral measures of attention across groups. The current proposal will expand on these data
by increasing sample size (n=75 ASIBs), adding a second comparison group (n=75 PTs), and examining a
specific biological substrate of disrupted attention (heart-defined attention; HDA) as well as general autonomic
integrity (baseline RSA). In addition, all data collection will occur in the home, which will greatly increase
participant accessibility and enrollment (especially for communities of color and rural populations).
Infant Autonomic Regulation of Attention is Associated with ASD Symptoms. Preliminary data related to
Aim 1 include trajectories of HDA during naturalistic parent-infant interactions from 1-4 months of age across
n=10 ASIBs, n=20 PTs, and n=30 TDs (K23MH120476; R21DC017252; PI: Bradshaw). These trajectories are
characterized by a significant increase in heart rate (HR) deceleration during sustained attention (F=10.24, p <
.001, Fig 4a) and point to a dampened HR deceleration that is developmentally transient for PTs, but persistent
for ASIBs 23. 949260 Moreover, HR deceleration during sustained attention to people at 3 months is associated with
early-emerging symptoms of ASD 26 (social-communication skills at 9mo 92; r=0.50; p<.05; Fig 4b). Our team’s
past 	research 	also 	suggests
dampened 	baseline 	RSA 	is
present very early in PTs 93, but
only later in ASD 90 (similar to other
work 58). 	Building 	on 	these
preliminary findings, we propose
to 	test 	the 	hypothesis 	that
autonomic 	dysregulation 	of
attention is present early in ASIBs
(Aim 	1), 	disrupts 	temporal
dynamics of physiology, attention,
and interactive behavior (Aim 2),
and is associated with elevated
ASD symptoms at age 3 (Aim 3).
Feasibility of Time-Locking HDA Phases to Interactive Behavior. Our data show that HDA-related HR
deceleration during a social interaction at 3 months is associated with social-communication outcomes at 9
months 92 (see above, Fig 4b). One interpretation of this preliminary finding is that more sustained attention during
social interaction reflects increased social engagement and learning, leading to better social-communication
skills 6 months later. Yet these data also point to questions about whether and how increased autonomic
regulation of attention may facilitate interactive behavior (and therefore learning) in the moment. Aim 2 will
address this question. Utilizing full electrocardiogram (ECG) waveform recordings (1024Hz) and frame-by-frame
Figure 4a. Trajectories of HDA
deceleration during social interactions.
Figure 4b. Association between HDA deceleration during
social interaction at 3-4mos and 9mo communication.

-- 5 of 12 --

video coding of gaze fixation, ongoing heart-defined phases of attention (HDA) are identified epoched based on
the onset of interactive behavior (also coded frame-by-frame from video). Our preliminary data (K23MH120476)
demonstrate feasibility in capturing infant interactive behavior in 6-12-month-olds26,94 and synchronizing
with HDA time-series data23.
In a preliminary analysis of N=12 infants, we identified the onset of interactive behavior (object exploration) and
calculated the proportion of time (i.e., relative frequency) of HDA phase in a time-series of 5 seconds prior to
each behavior onset (Fig 5). Findings point to between-group differences (TD vs ASIB) in autonomic regulation
of attention immediately preceding behavior. As expected, TD infants showed a consistent pattern of HDA
change within the 2 seconds immediately preceding
the 	behavior, 	characterized 	by 	an 	increase 	in
attention (increased attention orienting, green and
sustained attention, red). By contrast, ASIBs did
not 	show 	a 	clear 	pattern 	of 	HDA 	change
immediately 	preceding 	the 	behavior. 	Instead,
attention patterns remained stable up to 5 seconds
prior to the behavior, characterized by less overall
attention (more inattention, grey; less attention
orienting and sustained attention). The proposed
project will build upon this preliminary work in a
rigorous examination of moment-to-moment dynamics of HDA and interactive behavior across the first year.
Prediction of ASD Symptoms using Measures of ANS and Attention. In collaboration with Co-I (O’Reilly),
ECG data from 3-6-month-old ASIBs (N=7) and TDs (N=16) during interactions were collected and cleaned.
Several features were extracted (e.g., mean inter-beat-interval (IBI), standard deviation, root-mean-square
differences between adjacent IBI, discrete functional analysis, sample entropy) and an ablation study was used
for optimal feature selection. A multilayer perceptron was used to classify ASD likelihood (ASIB vs. TD) with 86%
accuracy (precision: 65%, sensitivity: 65%, specificity: 94%). These preliminary results compare advantageously
with a previous study reporting a 75.3% accuracy 95 and demonstrate scientific and technical feasibility in
feature extraction and application of machine learning models to predict ASD likelihood. In this proposal, we will
develop a more nuanced analysis predicting ASD symptoms on continuous scales using newly developed deep
neural implementation of mixed-effect linear models 96. The proposed project will use autonomic and attentional
features collected for Aims 1 and 2 to better understand how HDA can be leveraged in the formulation of
biomarkers in ASD. Our preliminary data suggest sufficient power for applying these methods to a sample
size that is over ten times larger than that of this pilot study (N=200; n=75 ASIBs). Further, large effect sizes
(detectable on relatively small samples) are critical for developing effective ASD biomarkers.
Regression Over Continuous Scales Rather than Binary Diagnoses Classification. ASD symptoms will be
captured using Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS-2) calibrated severity scores (CSS) 97. Our
preliminary data (PI Bradshaw 57 and Co-I O’Reilly) suggest sufficient variability in CSS scores across groups of
3-year-olds with and without ASD to determine meaningful associations between early infant biomarkers and
ASD symptoms. In the current proposal, we will further build on this direction using ANS-related predictors.
OVERALL EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
Participants. A total of 200 infants will be included in this study: 75 ASIBs, 75 PTs, and 50 TDs. Note that
our analyses are not powered to detect associations between predictors and binary ASD classification.
Rather, for Aim 3, our sample size is powered to detect associations with a continuous measure of ASD
symptoms at age 3 (see Power Analysis below). Our power analyses, published studies, 57 and preliminary data
suggest that this proposal is sufficiently powered to detect associations of infant biomarkers and ASD
symptoms 6,57,92 . All participants will be followed longitudinally from 1 month to 3 years, at which point stable ASD
symptoms can be quantified using ADOS CSS 98,99. In accordance with NIH guidelines for consideration of
relevant biological variables, we acknowledge that ASD prevalence is higher in males; however, males and
females will be recruited equally, and sex included as a covariate in all analyses.
Inclusion Criteria: 1) ASIB: born fullterm (>37w), have a full biological sibling with ASD (confirmation of
ASD in the older sibling: record review, direct clinical measures (SCQ100, CBCL 101 , SRS-2 102 ), expert clinical
judgement by licensed psychologist with expertise in ASD); 2) TD: born fullterm, have a full biological TD sibling
(confirmed with SCQ, CBCL, SRS, expert clinical judgment), no history of ASD in 1 st
-3 rd degree relatives; 3) PT:
gestational age (GA) at birth between 24 0/7–32 6/7 weeks, have a sibling, no family history of ASD in 1 st -3 rd degree
relatives. GA Considerations: PTs will be evenly stratified into 3 GA bins to ensure relatively even distribution
Figure 5. HDA
phases (relative
frequency of each
attention phase)
leading up to
object exploration
behavior for 9-
month-olds.

-- 6 of 12 --

of risk for ANS dysfunction: (24-26w; 27-29w; 30-32w). GA at birth will be included as a covariate in all analyses,
similar to our previous work 57,103. Exclusion criteria for all participants: failed newborn hearing screen, known
major hearing or visual impairments, non-febrile seizure disorders, known genetic/chromosomal syndromes
(e.g., Down Syndrome), congenital heart condition known to effect heart rate, severe brain hemorrhage and
periventricular leukomalacia (PVL). PTs will provide medical records for accurate eligibility assessment. To
maximize recruitment efforts of PTs, we are not excluding twins (but multiple birth will be considered in analyses).
TDs or PTs with an ASD diagnosis at outcome will be included in analyses (while considering GA and genetic
likelihood in models) to increase generalizability.
Feasibility of Recruitment/Enrollment. The current project capitalizes on significant, established
recruitment infrastructure, which has led to successful recruitment of ASIBs and PTs at USC. Resources include:
the UofSC Neurodevelopment Registry (N>1,100; PIs: Roberts and Bradshaw), the USC Infants and Children
Registry (N>150; PI: Richards, Bradshaw), multiple community partnerships (NICUs at the two largest hospital
systems in the state, SC SPARK, CAN Center at USC, DDSN, Pediatric practices, autism services providers).
USC investigators have direct outreach access to all children with ASD in the state of South Carolina (total
N>8,000; n=6,700<8yrs) through the Department of Disabilities and Special Needs (DDSN). This outreach has
been exceedingly successful for recruitment in the past (see Letters of Support). Our longitudinal studies
(K23MH120476, R21DC017252) reflect consistent, successful recruitment and retention of ASIBs, PTs, TDs, 1-
3 months of age with >95% retention. The PI’s lab consistently receives 30-50 referrals per week from
interested research participants in the local community and the average enrollment rate for ASIB studies at USC
is 12-18 participants/month. For 1-3-month-old ASIBs specifically, active recruitment in the PI’s lab and at USC
results in enrollment of 4-6/month. This track record demonstrates feasibility regarding enrollment for the
proposed project (target average:10-15 enrollments/month across all groups). Our outstanding recruitment
records are bolstered by established connections to supportive networks in South Carolina (ASD service
providers, schools, pediatricians, hospital NICUs) and state organizations serving ASD and PT populations have
pledged tremendous recruitment support (see Letters of Support). To maximize enrollment, we will leverage
in-home data collection for study visits. The investigative team has ~20 years of experience with in-home data
collection (TDs, PTs, ASIBs age 1wk-3yrs; N>450) and our data evidence that 99% of families (446/450+) prefer
in-home visits when given the choice of home vs. lab. This approach will significantly increase participant
recruitment/retention rates and support access for families with limited resources or located in rural areas.
Attrition. Resources for participant incentives and study visits include over-enrollment to account for
expected attrition (rate of 5% based on current longitudinal studies of ASIBs, PTs, and TDs enrolling at 1-4
months). This includes an additional N=16 participants to account for attrition (~5% lost to follow-up, n=10). Thus,
power analyses (described below) are based on the final expected sample of N=200.
Operational Considerations. The current project will capitalize on existing infrastructure and resources
from the PIs ongoing NIH awards (K23MH120476, R21DC017252), foundation grants (James S. McDonnell
Foundation), institutional awards, and institutional funds. The PI’s lab is staffed with 1 research assistant
professor, 1 postdoc, 4.5 research specialists, 1 psychologist, 1 fulltime recruitment coordinator, and 4 graduate
and 20 undergraduate students. Two current RAs are trained in most proposed data collection and processing
procedures and will be dedicated to this project. Two more RAs will be hired specifically for this project (see
Budget Justification). The PI and lab psychologist are licensed clinical psychologists and at least two research
staff are trained and reliable in all clinical measures.
EXPERIMENTAL PARADIGMS AND DATA COLLECTION
Data Collection Overview. A key component of this longitudinal study is dense sampling of infant behavior
to capture change during a rapid period of neurodevelopment. Accordingly, study visits will occur at months 1,
2, 3, 6, 9, and 12, with an additional 24-month questionnaire-only check-in (which will also support retention),
and a 36-month evaluation of ASD symptoms and overall development. Adjusted age will be used for all PT
visits. At visit months 1-3, autonomic regulation of attention will be measured with simultaneous video and heart
rate recording during administration of the well-established standardized neonatal measure NNNS-II (NICU
Network Neurobehavioral Scales-II; see Early Infant Attention Task below) 104 . At visit months 6-12, trained
research staff will video record two standardized infant interactions. Research staff will be masked to participant
group; parents will be reminded at each visit to refrain from discussing any family or medical history with staff.
All research staff will be trained to reliability (>80% agreement) in administration and scoring (where applicable)
of the clinical and experimental measures; reliability will be monitored monthly by the project psychologist. A
comprehensive evaluation of ASD symptoms and overall development will be administered at the 36-month time

-- 7 of 12 --

point. While study aims are not
designed (nor powered) to use
ASD 	diagnosis 	as 	a 	binary
outcome, 	a 	clinical 	best
estimate (CBE) procedure will
be used to assign an overall
diagnosis at 36 months in order
to 	comprehensively
characterize 	our 	sample.
ADOS 	calibrated 	severity
scores 	(RRB, 	Social 	Affect,
Total) will be used as a metric
of ASD symptoms for Aim 3,
similar to our previous work 57. In addition, each study visit will begin with a 5-min baseline ECG recording while
the infant is laying or sitting still watching a video of fractals with classical music (to encourage restfulness/
reduce movement). As in previous work 58,59, baseline autonomic function will be indexed with respiratory sinus
arrhythmia 	(RSA; 	a 	measure 	of 	cardiorespiratory 	control 	that 	reflects 	general 	autonomic 	integrity 105;
CardioBatch 106 .
Early Infant Attention Task from the NNNS-II (Aim 1). Attention will be measured from 1-3m during a
standardized, readily translatable measure (NNNS-II) that is grounded in a developmental, neurobehavioral
framework and aligns with study aims and hypotheses. The NNNS-II is a 15-20-minute direct evaluation of
neurological functioning and behavioral adaptation of at-risk (e.g., medically compromised, preterm) and healthy
neonates 107 . The PI has >6 years experience administering the NNNS, is a certified NNNS-II examiner and
trainer, and has published on attention using the NNNS in TDs and ASIBs 6,57. Of interest to the current study are
the NNNS-II Attention items, which examine the infant’s ability to block out external (and internal) stimuli and
attend to visual and auditory stimuli. Six attention items include inanimate (ball and rattle) and animate (face and
voice) stimuli that are presented visually with sound (rattle; face/voice), visually without sound (ball; face), and
auditory only (rattle/voice out of sight). Administration is done with the examiner holding the infant in their lap in
a flat or semi-elevated position. To obtain optimal performance, examiners implement handling strategies to
keep the infant in a calm, alert state (handling strategies are recorded). Attention item administration = 3-6min.
Infant Interaction Task (Aim 2). Infant HDA and interactive behavior will be recorded during two semi-
structured, table-based infant interactions at 6, 9, and 12 months (see Fig 7 and our work using these protocols
in 6-12-month-olds 26,94). To capture both social and object interactive behaviors, two interactions will be
completed. The Social Interaction occurs with an examiner and caregiver (ecologically valid context for infants)
and is designed to elicit social interaction behaviors, similar to common social-communication measures for
infants (e.g., CSBS 108 ). The PI is a close
collaborator of the CSBS author (Amy
Wetherby) 26,75,109 and our research staff
are trained and supervised in the CSBS-
BS by Dr. Wetherby’s research staff. The
Object 	Interaction 	(no 	caregivers) 	is
designed to elicit independently initiated
object 	exploration 	behavior. 	Our
research 	team 	has 	successfully
administered this experimental task to
quantify object behaviors 94. Social and
Object 	interactions 	are 	equated 	on
duration 	and 	number 	of 	objects
presented to the infant (n=5; Fig 7).
Autism Symptoms (Aim 3). ASD symptoms at 36m will be captured using ADOS-2 calibrated severity
scores (CSS): Social Affect, Restricted and Repetitive Behaviors (RRBs), and Total 97. ADOS examiners will be
trained to research reliability and supervised by the PI and project psychologist. When the administering
examiner is unintentionally unmasked on a study visit, a masked examiner will score the ADOS from video to
ensure scientific rigor. CSSs range from 1-10 and represent an excellent measure of ASD symptoms, relatively
independent from IQ and language abilities 97,110.
Figure 7. Infant Interaction Protocol
Figure 6. Data collection timeline and primary dependent variables. Note that some important
measures are not depicted, including covariates (e.g., NICU-related morbidities, GA, motor skills).

-- 8 of 12 --

Data Processing
Electrocardiogram (ECG) Recordings. ECG recordings will be collected at each time point between 1-12
months via Actiheart 111 wireless heart rate monitors, sampled at 1024Hz. The research team has extensive
experience using these monitors for successful, continuous recording of infant ECG. Video recordings of all
experimental paradigms will be collected for synchronization of ECG recordings with behavioral events
(behaviorally 	coded 	later 	from 	video). 	Specialized 	software 	programs, 	CardioPeakSegmenter 	and
CardioEditPlus 106,112 , will be used for R peak detection, segmentation, and artifact removal.
Baseline Autonomic Function will be indexed using overall RSA from a 5-min baseline recording 106 .
Synchronization of ECG and Video Recordings. Actiheart wireless heart rate monitors are incredibly user-
friendly and allow unrestricted movement for infants and caregivers. The start time of the ECG recording (based
on a remote computer time) is used as the synchronization signal and is captured (video recorded) at the
beginning of the experiment (i.e., the start time and run time of the ECG recording is captured on the video that
will later be coded for infant behavior). Our custom data processing pipeline then crops the ECG recording to
align ECG and Video start times (time 0(ECG)= time 0(Video)), allowing precise alignment of behavioral coding
(described below) and ECG. This method has been used successfully in the PI’s lab for the past 4 years 23,92.
Behavioral Coding of Infant Gaze. Coding of infant looking is needed to identify heart defined phases of
attention. Thus, frame-by-frame video coding of infant looking using DataVyu software will be completed by
trained and reliable undergraduate RAs masked to group. The PI has 16 years of experience in behavioral coding
and the PI’s lab has established procedures and manuals for coding infant looking during interactions 23,92. Coders
will identify the onset and offset of infant looks to pre-identified target stimuli (object, caregiver, examiner) during
NNNS attention items (1-3m) and infant interactions (6-12m). For all interactions, only one object at a time will
be presented. Our established training/reliability procedures ensure high research rigor.
Behavioral Coding of Infant Interactive Behavior. The occurrence of infant interactive behaviors will be
coded from video by masked RAs (Aim 2). Dr. Iverson (Co-I) is a renowned expert in capturing infant social 113–
116 and object 117–119 interactive behavior in PTs 120,121 and ASIBs 114,117 and will assist with this process. Due to
rapid development in social and object interaction skills from 6-12 months, behaviors will be categorized as
“earlier” and “later” emerging (Fig 7 above). This will allow our measures to account for maturation in interactive
behaviors and avoid floor and ceiling effects at each time point. For example, we expect no infants show “later”
social acts at 6m (words and gestures) but many infants show “earlier” social acts at 6m and 12m (social smiles).
HDA. The PI and Co-Is O’Reilly and Richards developed customized Matlab and Python scripts to
synchronize heart rate (HR) with infant looking to calculate onsets and offset of HDA phases (sustained attention
defined as 5 successive beats with HR slower than pre-look HR median 22,23,92). Summary variables calculated
for analysis will include duration of sustained attention (%SA) and heart rate deceleration during sustained
attention; these have been associated with enhanced learning 122 and will serve as the primary DVs (Aims 1-2).
Covariates and Demographic Data. Sociodemographic data (race, ethnicity, income, education, home
address) and medical history (pregnancy, birth, and early postnatal period) will be collected at the first visit. For
PTs, morbidity scores 123 will be derived from medical records and in-depth NICU questionnaire (APGAR scores,
overall time in NICU, presence/duration of medical supports (e.g., ventilator), neurological damage (IVH),
infections, and surgeries). Due to the potential impact of NICU-related stimulation and stress on cardiorespiratory
functions, these variables will be considered as covariates in analyses. Co-I Dail has expertise in evaluating and
selecting relevant variables. Annual questionnaires about parental concerns, developmental milestones (ASQ-
3 124 ), and any early intervention services will be collected. Given the impact of maternal depression on early
social development, mothers will complete a depression measure (EPDS 125 ) at months 1, 3, and 6. The PI and
project psychologist have the clinical expertise to evaluate and address clinical depression and will refer mothers
for appropriate care. Motor questionnaires 126 will be completed at each visit to control for impact of motor delays
on attention and interactive behavior. Outcome cognitive and motor skills will serve as covariates in all analyses.
Data Management. Management of ECG, video, questionnaires, and behavioral assessments will be led by
the Project Manager. Undergraduates will be trained in cleaning and editing of raw ECG files (CardioEdit,
CardioBatch), video files will be recorded to SD cards and immediately transferred to our secure server. REDCap
will be used for parent questionnaires and to store behavioral data (using double data entry/validation). Original
forms will be scanned, stored on a secure server, and shredded to protect participant confidentiality.
Experimental data will be processed and linked to demographic/behavioral data for statistical analysis.
SPECIFIC AIM MEASURES AND ANALYSES
Aim 1. Compare the maturation of autonomic regulation of attention in the early infant period (1-3m)
across ASIBs, PTs, and TDs.

-- 9 of 12 --

Overview and Hypotheses. Behavioral measures of attention at 2-3 months reveal significant associations
with ASD/ASD symptoms 6,7,57, but biological underpinnings have not been identified. Behavioral measures of
looking coordinated with heart rate deceleration reflect focused attention, brain arousal system activation, and
enhanced learning 78,122,127 . Thus, HDA in early infancy reflects physiological regulation required to attend to, and
learn from, the environment. Aim 1 will directly test the hypothesis that the maturation of autonomic
regulation of attention in young infants from 1-3 months is delayed for PTs and disrupted for ASIBs.
Measures. Baseline autonomic function will be measured with RSA extracted from a 5-min baseline
recording. Autonomic regulation of attention will be measured during the six Attention items of the NNNS-II (see
Data Collection Overview above). Attention to each stimulus will be coded from video and temporally
synchronized with ECG data to calculate: %time in heart-defined sustained attention (%SA = time in SA / task
duration) and heart rate deceleration in sustained attention (HR-decel = maxHR–minHR during each SA phase).
Analytic Plan. We will utilize latent growth curve models (LGCM) to characterize trajectories of HDA (%SA;
HRdec) as well as baseline autonomic function (RSA) from 1-3 months. LGCMs can be considered comparable
to multilevel models and, in many cases, they are numerically identical, however there are several specific
advantages to LGCM approaches 128 . For a single manifest variable measured at a minimum of three time points,
an LGCM can be fit to estimate two latent factors, i.e., intercept and slope. This approach is established within
a structural equation model (SEM) framework, which allows us to take advantage of the flexibility and broadness
of SEM models with the following added benefits: 1) ability to assess global model fit 128,129, 2) easy handling of
missing data within and between visits using the full information maximum likelihood strategy 130, 3) inclusion of
latent predictor(s)/outcome(s) in model 128,129,131. Recent research has confirmed that this technique can be
applied to small sample sizes with missing data 130. We will first plot individual trajectories of HDA (%SA, HRdec)
to explore differential patterns. The model fit will be determined using chi square tests and fit indices, such as
the root mean square error of approximation and the comparative fit index. Mean values of growth factors
(intercept, slope) will be estimated and compared across groups (TD, PT, ASIB). We will also examine the
variance of the growth factors to test whether individuals share the same starting points and rate of change over
time. Covariance between growth factors will provide information about individuals’ growth rates related to their
starting point. Effects of baseline or outcome characteristics (e.g., gestational age at birth, NICU-related
morbidity, biological sex, SES, cognitive outcomes) will be controlled for in all analyses. This is critical as a
substantial minority of preterm infants also show cognitive delays 132 . Power Analysis. Estimated power for
growth curve models was calculated following a simulation-based approach (1000 simulation replicates) 34.
Power rates were computed by assuming 3 measurement occasions and linear growth. Population values used
for the simulation were obtained by fitting the linear latent class models (LCM) to our pilot data. Given 200
subjects, power rates to detect individual variability in intercepts and slopes were 0.99 and 0.99, respectively.
To detect group differences in trajectories, we computed the power to detect a significant difference in terms of
mean slopes between two groups (n=75, n=50) and estimated power was 0.81. Finally, given N=200, we can
detect a medium effect (R 2=0.25) when predicting continuous outcomes (ASD severity) with 86% power.
Expected Outcomes and Interpretation. Due to global ANS dysfunction at birth, PTs will show reduced
baseline RSA and autonomic regulation of attention (less %SA and less HRdec) from 1-3 months compared to
TDs (PT 1-3mo < TD1-3mo). Due to intact global ANS functioning for ASIBs at birth, baseline RSA for ASIBs will be
comparable to TDs from 1-3 months. ASIB HDA, on the other hand, will be comparable to TDs at 1 month
(ASIB1mo = TD1mo), but as attention and heart rate become increasingly coordinated over time, ASIBs will diverge
from TDs by 3 months (ASIB 3mo < TD3mo), similar to our behavioral work 6,57. Due to the hypothesized attention-
specific ANS deficit for ASIBs, HDA will be reduced for ASIBs by 3 months (ASIB3mo < PT 3mo < TD3mo).
Aim 2. Determine the moment-to-moment influence of autonomic regulation of attention on interactive
behavior across the first year (6m, 9m, 12m).
Overview and Hypotheses. ASIBs26,117,133,134 and PTs135–137 follow unique developmental trajectories of
interactive behavior. We have three hypotheses regarding the predictive association between HDA and in-the-
moment interactive behaviors: 1) In alignment with our pilot data, TDs will show strong, consistent patterns of
HDA that predict interactive behaviors, 2) PTs’ initially immature ANS will cause initially weak predictive
associations that improve over time as ANS matures, 3) ASIBs will show disrupted associations that weaken
(worsen) over time as ASD symptoms emerge. In addition, baseline ANS function trajectories will be compared.
Measures. Interactive behavior will be recorded at 6, 9, and 12 months using a standardized protocol (see
above, Infant Interaction Task, Fig 7). The onset of each interactive behavior will be
recorded and synchronized with time series HDA to examine, with fine temporal
resolution, 	the 	influence 	of 	HDA 	on 	interactive 	behavior. 	Because 	motor Figure 8. Possible transitions
between HDA phases.

-- 10 of 12 --

differences/delays 	may 	influence 	the 	frequency/function 	of 	interactive 	behavior 138 , 	visit-specific 	motor
questionnaires 126 will be included as a covariate.
Analytic Plan. We will use HDA times series locked to behavior onsets to study the dynamics of the
autonomic attentional system leading up to interactive behavior. We will compare modeling capability of the
following alternative approaches: (1) Continuous-time Markov chain (CTMC): Our previous work has
employed Markov chains to understand dynamics of social attention in toddlers with ASD 139 . A CTMC describes
a continuous stochastic process in which the process changes state according to an exponential random
variable, moving to a different state with probabilities specified for a Markovian process. We will use this
approach to model the process of changing from one HDA phase to the next when moving backward in time,
starting from a given action. The structure of the model is fixed given four HDA phases (not looking, orienting,
sustained attention, termination) and includes one time constant per state and seven transition probabilities (see
Fig 8), for a total of 11 parameters. These parameters will be estimated per subject and the distribution of these
parameters will be compared between groups. Subject-specific parameters will be estimated in a Bayesian
framework using the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approach. (2) Simple historical mean: We will
compute the inter-beat-interval (IBI) historical mean and corresponding confidence intervals leading up to a
behavior. These trajectories will be used to assess group differences in the historical mean and in its time
derivatives (speed, acceleration, jerk) to assess group differences in autonomic-attention-action system
dynamics. Cluster-based permutation tests will be used to determine periods of time showing statistical
differences between groups while accounting for multiple comparisons. This approach is considered as a simpler
approach to offer a benchmark for the other, more complex, approach, and previous studies show that simpler
approaches often yield better outcomes 140 . Model Comparison. We will evaluate the effect size obtained with
these approaches to determine which one best captures the dynamics of HDA leading to marked behaviors and
extract relevant features (e.g., fitted modeling parameters, historical means over temporal windows, rate of
decrease in predictability) as potential biomarkers for ASD symptoms (see Aim 3). Power Analysis. Between-
group comparisons for the different parameters estimated (i.e., CTMC parameters, IBI means/derivatives over
time windows) will be entered into growth models to evaluate this longitudinal data. We therefore expect the
same statistical power as Aim 1: range of .81-.99 to detect a medium effect for N=200.
Expected Outcomes and Interpretation: We hypothesize that: (1) baseline autonomic function (RSA) from
6-9 months will be reduced in PTs compared to ASIBs and TDs, but show gradual improvement over time; (2)
ASIB RSA will be largely similar to TDs (similar to previous work showing later-emerging RSA disruption in
ASD58). In terms of HDA-behavior coordination, PTs (global ANS dysfunction at birth) will show initial reduced
HDA-behavior coordination, and therefore weak HDA-behavior associations, compared to TDs. But the effect
size of this group difference will decrease over time (PT 6mo<TD6mo  PT 12mo ~=TD12mo). ASIBs (hypothesized
developmental cascade wherein attention-specific ANS deficits are present early, by 3 months, and contribute
to disrupted emergence of interactive behavior 8) will show increasingly weak associations of HDA with interactive
behaviors compared to TDs (ASIB6mo<TD6mo  ASIB12mo<<<TD12mo ). ASIBs’ autonomic-attention-behavior
system dynamics may be initially comparable to PTs (ASIB6mo = PT 6mo < TD6mo) due to prolonged ANS
dysfunction for PTs. But by 12 months, ASIBs will significantly diverge (ASIB 12mo < PT12mo ~= TD12mo).
Aim 3. Predict ASD symptoms at age 3 years from infant autonomic and attentional features.
Overview and Hypotheses. Univariate statistical methods for biomarker discovery may be inadequate for
capturing the complexity of biological processes involved in a multifaceted, heterogeneous neurodevelopmental
disorder 27. Machine learning (ML) provides unique tools for examining relationships binding multiple interacting
variables 28. Many biomarker studies of ASD (blood, metabolic) have implications for elucidating pathophysiology
and improving diagnostic accuracy 141–144, but the lack of conceptual or functional links from biomarker to
behavior prevents direct translation to behavioral interventions. This aim will incorporate biobehavioral
measures of baseline autonomic function (RSA) and autonomic regulation of attention (HDA) to predict ASD
symptoms. We hypothesize features collected from 1-12 months will predict ASD symptoms at age 3 years.
Measures. We will use a ML approach considering as features the variables and parameters estimated for
Aims 1-2 (regardless of whether the impact of the variables has reach statistical significance for the specific
analyses proposed in those aims), as well as simple additional statistics (e.g., overall time in HDA phases) and
features established in our preliminary studies (i.e., statistics of heart rate variability, discrete functional analysis,
sample entropy from pre-processed ECG with empirical mode decomposition and discrete wavelet transform).
As in our previous work 57, ASD symptoms (36m) will be measured using the ADOS-2 Calibrated Severity Scores.
Analytic Plan. To optimize the use of our sample while precluding overfitting and ensuring reproducibility on
new data, performance regarding ASD symptom prediction will be cross-validated using a leave-one-subject-out
approach. These cross-validated predictions will be compared against the traditional regression approach (i.e.,

-- 11 of 12 --

with no test-train split) to assess the degree of overfitting that would result from not splitting the dataset. If
overfitting is negligible, this model will be considered final. Else, we will identify the subjects for which the cross-
validation prediction is significantly different from the non-cross-validated model, reject the subjects, and re-test.
Previous studies using ML in ASD with children and infants concentrated on diagnosis classification. They used
various classification methods (support vector machine, k-nearest neighbors, naive Bayes, random forest) and
obtained accuracy roughly in the 0.75-0.85 range 145–147. These studies vary widely with respect to the properties
of their sample (e.g., large differences in sample size), their constructs (analysis of electroencephalogram versus
spoken language), their objectives (diagnosis in infants versus in children), and their methods in general. As
preliminary results, we showed that ANS properties assessed through ECG can be used for prediction by
obtaining an 86% accuracy for the classification of ASD risk (ASIB vs TD) using a multilayer perceptron. In this
proposal, we will use similar deep learning models in the context of regression96 to predict continuous
phenotypic outcomes (autism symptomology; ADOS CSS scores). Continuous outcomes will be assessed
through the goodness of fit of regression models (e.g., coefficient of determination, R 2). Power Analysis.
Sufficient power in our sample is supported by our preliminary demonstration of high predictivity of ECG-derived
features for capturing ASD likelihood (classification accuracy=.86 with only N=23). Clinical significance, rather
than mere statistical significance, requires large effect sizes (e.g., large R 2). As opposed to p-values, effect sizes
do not depend on power and sample size. Reliability of R 2 estimates will be determined using confidence intervals
computed with bootstrapping. For a sample size of 200 infants, a single predictor (derived from the combination
of many features), and an R 2=0.5, the expected 95% confidence interval (CI) goes from 0.40 to 0.60 (for R 2=0.6,
95% CI = .51-.68). Thus, this study is well-sampled for reasonably narrow CIs on at least medium effect sizes.
Aim 3 Expected Outcomes and Interpretation: We hypothesize that early autonomic-attentional features
will predict ASD symptoms that do not emerge until age 2-3 years. Further, through ablation study, we will
examine which features from which time points (e.g., 1-3mos vs. 6-12mos) contribute most to predictability. We
expect predictability to be highest for attention-specific features and to increase with age.
RIGOR AND REPRODUCIBILITY
Rigor and reproducibility of this project is apparent in our prospective longitudinal design with masked examiners,
monitoring of inter-rater reliability/agreement (>80%) for experimental and clinical measures, consideration of
potential confounds (GA, medical morbidities, sex), sample size selected based on a priori power analyses, and
an investigative team with expertise in grant management/physiology (Roberts, Richards), ANS/prematurity
(Dail), infant behavior (Iverson), and signal processing, machine learning, computational neuroscience (O’Reilly).
Potential Problems, Alternative Strategies, & Benchmarks for Success. This project will be initiated
nearly upon funding as we have existing recruitment infrastructure and a team trained in most experimental and
clinical measures. Activities will occur as follows: recruitment Y1-2, data collection/processing Y1-5, data
analyses Y2-5, publications Y3-5 (see Human Subjects-Study Timeline). Recruitment and attrition are potential
concerns for any longitudinal study. Considering past success of the PI and Co-Is in neonatal PT and ASIB
recruitment, a plan to see participants in their home statewide, a large research staff, and significant resources
dedicated to recruitment, we do not anticipate any difficulty with meeting enrollment targets. We will access
institutional funds to support recruitment/retention, dedicate a fulltime recruitment coordinator solely to this
project, utilize multiple state-specific autism databases, and employ retention strategies (frequent contact with
families through social media and clinical feedback). It is highly possible that examiners may be unmasked to
participant group during home visits. We mitigate this by: attempting to schedule visits when siblings are out of
the home, reminding families to keep examiners masked to family history, collecting data on when examiners
are unmasked (to explore in analytic models), process data using masked coders/psychologists (ECG data,
attention data, behavioral data, ADOS scores). Our statistical design is robust to within and between-visit
missing data, we will use state-of-the-art ECG artifact corrections using wavelet and empirical mode
decomposition, and we rely on refined longitudinal modeling (i.e., growth curves). In order to ensure robust
findings, we will cross-validate our results by employing additional analytic strategies (e.g., mixed effects
regression, general linear models) when appropriate. GA in PTs: While recent evidence suggests that ANS
dysfunction relates more to morbidity than GA 123 , we will stratify PT recruitment by three evenly divided birth GA
bins (all <32w) to ensure sufficient ANS immaturity. Significant phenotypic heterogeneity is expected in ASIB
and PT groups. Therefore, comprehensive characterization of ASD and developmental profiles at 36m for all
participants will allow for analyses to extend beyond between-group comparisons (Aims 1-2) to include key
covariates or stratifiers that can parse out heterogeneity and reveal complex, meaningful interactions. Aim 3 is
not dependent on Aims 1-2 as significant results are not a requisite for including these variables in feature
selection procedures (i.e., failure for a test to reach statistical significance does not prove the absence of useful
predictive information) and, in fact, may elucidate novel findings above and beyond Aims 1-2.

-- 12 of 12 --

