SPECIFIC AIMS
Atypical attention is among the earliest-emerging, lifelong features of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and a
particularly compelling candidate for an ASD biomarker 1–4. Our work, and that of others, suggests that disrupted
attention may be detectable and developmentally predictive in early infancy 5–8, yet the biological underpinnings
of this disruption remain unknown. The autonomic nervous system (ANS) is an early-emerging bioregulatory
system critical for supporting neonatal arousal and infant attention 9–11. Early disruptions in ANS’s regulation of
attention (“autonomic regulation of attention”) may have cascading consequences for interaction, learning, and
development 8,9,11. Broad ANS dysfunction is observed in older children already diagnosed with ASD 12, but there
remains a tremendous gap in knowledge regarding whether and when ANS dysfunction contributes to attention
abnormalities and how infant autonomic regulation of attention predicts the emergence of ASD symptoms.
The current study fills this gap by examining autonomic regulation of attention in the neonatal period and the
developmental consequences therein for the emergence of ASD symptoms in infant siblings of children with
ASD (ASIBs), infants born preterm (PTs), and typically developing (TD) infants. A critical innovation of this study
is leveraging a comparison group of PTs who, intriguingly, experience global ANS dysfunction from birth 9,13–15.
While PTs show slightly elevated rates of ASD (~7%) compared to the general population (~2%) 16, the vast
majority of PTs do not develop ASD. In this study, inclusion of PT infants as a model for global ANS
dysfunction will help investigate our hypothesis that early and broad ANS dysfunction (not specific to attention)
does not lead to ASD-specific symptoms. This developmental process (broad ANS dysfunction  non-ASD
specific outcomes) will be contrasted to ASIBs who experience significantly higher rates of ASD (~20%) 17.
Contrasting PTs to ASIBs will help delineate how attention-specific ANS dysfunction predicts the emergence of
ASD-specific symptoms. Thus, our innovative three-group research design will compare ASIBs to two control
groups (PTs and TD infants) to determine the specificity of autonomic regulation of attention as a key, early
emerging feature associated with ASD, with incredible translational potential for a cost-effective biomarker.
Aim 1. Compare the maturation of autonomic regulation of attention in the early infant period (1-3m)
across ASIBs, PTs, and TDs. Attention in the first months of life is supported by flexible modulation of arousal
and alertness, regulated by the ANS 18–20 . Autonomic regulation allows for attention to salient features of the
environment and inhibition of responses to irrelevant (internal or external) stimuli. ANS regulation of attention is
vital for learning and can be measured using heart-defined attention (HDA) (i.e., coordination of heart rate
changes within moments of visual attention 21,22). Maturation of ANS and attention
systems across the first months of life lead to increasing coordination of heart rate
with attention. Our pilot work with ASIBs shows differences in HDA quantity (%time in
HDA) and quality (magnitude of heart rate deceleration) 23,24. Building upon this work,
Aim 1 will test the hypothesis that ASIBs show typical HDA initially compared to
TDs. Then from 1-3m, as ANS commands an increasingly larger role in regulating
attention, the development of HDA for ASIBs will attenuate. In contrast, PTs will show
delayed HDA maturation from 1-3m (adjusted age) due to broad ANS dysfunction 25.
Aim 2. Determine the moment-to-moment influence of autonomic regulation of attention on interactive
behavior across the first year (6m, 9m, 12m). Autonomic regulation of attention, measured via heart activity
and contextualized within moment-by-moment behavior, has 	extraordinary 	potential 	to transform early
identification of ASD by revealing specific mechanistic relations between ANS, attention, and interactive
behavior. 	Our 	preliminary 	data 	suggests: 	(1) 	temporal
coordination between HDA and interactive behavior in TDs
and (2) reduced HDA-behavior coordination in ASIBs. Aim 2
will test the hypothesis that ASIBs show weakening predictive
associations between HDA and interactive behavior from 6-
12 months, as early symptoms of ASD emerge 26. In contrast,
we expect PTs to show initially weak associations that
strengthen over time (with ANS and behavioral maturation) 25.
Aim 3. Predict ASD symptoms at age 3 years from infant autonomic and attentional features.
ASD biomarker discovery requires quantitative modeling techniques that adequately capture the complexity of
biological processes involved in such a multifaceted, heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder 27,28. Aim 3
will leverage machine learning techniques to develop a biomarker predicting the later emergence of ASD
symptoms based on early (1-12 months) features of the autonomic and attentional systems (variables from Aims
1-2). We hypothesize that features related to infant autonomic regulation of attention will predict ASD symptoms.

-- 1 of 1 --

